Fines totalling more than $50,000 have been imposed on the owners and manager of an Eastern Bay of Plenty dairy farm where wastewater was allowed to pool in a paddock.
Glenholme Farms has been found guilty of discharging effluent on to land and was fined $36,000 while the farm manager, Alexander Atkinson, who faced the same charge, was fined $17,000 in the Tauranga District Court.
The court heard that after an irrigation system stalled on a Nukuhou farm, effluent began to pool in a paddock and flowed into a watercourse, potentially polluting the Nukuhou River which flows to Ohiwa Harbour.
Both the farm and manager were told to fit a fail-safe device on the irrigator and were also given an order for an effluent management plan to be given to the Bay of Plenty Regional Council (BOPRC) for approval by February next year.
The case follows that of another Nukuhau farmer, Paul Warneford of Warneford Farms Ltd, who faced the same charge in November.
He was convicted and fined $26,000, also for allowing an irrigation machine to discharge dairy effluent into a waterway leading to the Nukuhou River.
In a third case, a Maketu man and farm owner were fined $24,500 and $40,500 respectively for allowing effluent to flow into a farm drainage system that discharges into the Kaituna River.
There were a total of 80 dairy effluent prosecutions brought by the regional council this year.
The council's pollution prevention manager, Nick Zaman, said the latest sentence should be a reminder that such disregard for the protection of the region's environment would not be tolerated.
"In this case, reasonable steps could have been taken to avoid ponding and overland flow of farm effluent to a watercourse," Mr Zaman said.
"The vast majority of farmers comply with regulations and have a well-managed effluent system, but farmers who do not take their responsibilities seriously enough need to understand there will be consequences.
Mr Zaman said the "she'll be right" attitude did not work with large herd sizes and effluent management had to be a higher priority than it currently appeared to be for some farm operators.