Seems to me what we want to do constantly trumps what we need to do - even when it's a matter of species survival.
We need to stop changing the climate, but don't want to give up our luxuries to do it.
And we know thousands of species are being extinguished through over-exploitation, but we refuse to acknowledge that, as a result, our own may soon follow.
Consider what we are doing to the "last frontier" - the sea.
That blueness hides myriad spectacular environments, most of which we, being land animals, know little - and care less - about.
Surely even the most sceptical must begin to think there's a problem when local snapper prices threaten $50 a kilo.
We rightly protest fishing methods that see other species caught as bycatch and thrown away - turtles, dolphins, birds too - but still opt to buy the cans of Pam's "sustainably caught" tuna over Sealord's still-indiscriminate catch without thinking about the fate of the fish themselves.
They are also highly prized as food, especially by the Japanese who can pay $1000 or more per kilo for fresh bluefin for sushi - and that's wholesale.
Doubtless why, this week, two more bluefin species - Atlantic and bigeye - were added to the endangered list.
Same goes for whales. The International Whaling Commission meets this week for another round of debate over so-called "research" whaling - but in the wake of the tsunami word is delegates will go softly on Japan, especially as many fishing-fleet towns were hardest hit by that disaster.
Especially as they have no scruples in buying votes to get away with whale murder.
These substances - such as the metal, yttrium - drive technology manufacture and with 97 per cent currently mined in China everyone's eager to break that near-monopoly. So expect large-scale sea-mining soon.
Unlike visibly in our national parks, they'll probably have little trouble with consents where it's hidden under the waves. Regardless of the impacts - if they even bother to investigate.
Oops! Silly me. A need can't compete with a want, can it.
Bruce Bisset is a freelance writer and poet.