Eight cash hungry Kiwi tech companies have pitched their business plans to one of the world's most high-powered venture capitalists during an event held at the top of a central Auckland high-rise this afternoon.
But Silicon Valley-based Vinod Khosla, the billionaire founder of high-powered investment firm Khosla Ventures, is giving away few clues about whether any of those companies will receive funding.
"There's a number I'd intend to follow and delve deeper [into]," said Khosla, who co-founded software giant Sun Microsystems in 1982.
He said the process of allocating funding took three to four months, sometimes longer.
Companies making pitches this afternoon included high-tech electric folding bicycle maker Yike Bike, robotics developer Rex Bionics and Carbonscape, a Blenheim-based firm whose technology turns sawmill waste into valuable products including carbon, syngas and bio-oil.
Khosla said Yike Bike and Rex Bionics in particular had caught his attention.
"Most of them were good businesses, the question I will ask is - can I contribute enough thinking to make them much bigger than they are thinking of themselves as?" he said.
Khosla's firm has already sunk US$3.5 million into Auckland's LanzaTech, whose technology converts polluting industrial gases into high-value chemicals such as ethanol, used in the production of biofuel.
He said the innovation eco-system in New Zealand needed developing.
"Most of that is giving entrepreneurs confidence," Khosla said. "I always say you need overconfidence and arrogance to be an entrepreneur - it's an essential quality of entrepreneurship [to] almost not know what your limitations are ... I think that is missing [in New Zealand]."
To compare, he said the innovation ecosystem in the California's Silicon Valley was very well developed.
"Almost every kid graduating from Stanford [University] thinks they can start a company," he said. "I would venture to guess that 50 per cent of the graduates of something like the computer science department of Stanford end up starting a company or being part of a company even before they graduate."
Khosla said that while Silicon Valley teenagers idolised Facebook founder Mark Zuckerburg, Kiwi start-ups needed more local role models like LanzaTech, which signed up its first commercial customer this week.
"I see LanzaTech as a very large, public company in five years, with a wide array of products and hopefully leveraging a large number of partners - very large corporations."