*    How ignorant for people to say cats should be inside at night. Maybe the nutters who shoot cats at night should be tucked up like the rest of us normal people. It's also ironic that the local SPCA could close in Hastings - no wonder, with stone-age comments being texted in!
*    If you read the paper properly you would see that Minnie was shot in the morning in broad daylight, not at night.
*    To the hot guy with the Tyla tattoo who helped us with our radiator at Whitepines: A huge thank you. Billy has told all about the Top Man who helpd us. Cheers GSB
*    Our thanks to a company that sorted our garage door and no thanks to a company that came back 3 times and wouldn't complete the job.
*    Re rates rises by services: Whakatu has polluting and noisy industries working 24/7 directly across the road from residents' houses, whose families pre-date these industries in Whakatu. What other areas have to accept this? Can Deputy Mayor Cynthia Bowers explain how this is allowed to continue? I'm sure it wouldn't do in Havelock or other affluent suburbs.
*    Napier ratepayers pay $1m for a few penguins. The Goverment gives Samoa $25m. When are these people going to stop wasting our hard-earned dollars and start spending it on the needy people of New Zealand? A few good house mums would do a better job of running the country. Brian Thomas, Taradale
*    If you are patched up in a criminal gang I guess you then qualify for participating in a criminal organisation. Jail all patched members for 3 years and watch their numbers drop overnight. SF
*    Can anyone tell me what's happened with Tommo's in Hastings?
*    HB Museums Trust: "Jobs may go if more funds refused." So what else is new under the current government?
*    I think the new road rules changing how drivers give way is going to do a lot more than "maybe cause some confusion". If it ain't broke, why fix it?
*    Another idiot indicated right to go straight through the Omahu Rd Expressway roundabout. I should have run you over instead of braking. When is the NZTS going to do some education on correct indication at roundabouts? Tim Drown
*    If HB Today comes in time to read before I go to work at 8am I'll keep getting it. But if it pokes out of my mailbox all day getting wet and obstructing mail, I'll cancel it.
*    Mankind has deliberately been kept poor as a means of keeping him under control. Is this not the truth?
*    A possible $600 bill if your roaming kid was harmed at night? Get real. Try the $350 damage already done to plants in my garden by neighbouring "house" cats.
*    I heartily agree with Eva B. Rubbish isn't cheap at any price.
*    Get rid of bludgers at the top, not our hard-working nurses.
*    I read that the Hastings SPCA may close due to lack of funds. How about the ones who cause the organisation to be there? Do something and desex your animals.
*    What's the point spending a billion on Broadband when kids are malnourished and medical care is third world?
*    Re Carol Murfitt compaining about bad news being on the front page: Wake up and smell the coffee, love. I would far prefer to see photos of local scum who are robbing our houses on the front page than glossing over what's happening in our area and another photo of Art Deco. Ask the folk who were robbed while at the event at the weekend. GR
*    Hastings AA: I agree with C Williams. The staff are rude, misinform and chat loudly to each other while you are waiting to be served. This happened many times to myself and others. We avoid it and go to Napier.
*    With good, willing, hard-working folk out of work in HB, why do tradesmen employ folk who don't know their craft? In our case the guy got cross because he didn't have a clue.
*    Re dog owners in the Mayfair area: ? am a dog owner and the only time my dog barks at night is when neighbours' cats are running loose and entering everybody's properties. So, you cat lovers, tie your cats up like we have to with our dogs and that should solve the problem. Cats cause problems, too, and if my dog does damage to someone's cat on my property, whose fault would it be?
*    Hospitals are under-staffed and under-funded. No wonder there are mishaps. Put tax dollars where needed. Bucky
*    Auckland Feminist Action (AFA) group, how ridiculous can you get? The Tui beer girl adverts are good fun. Get a life, killjoys. DP