Go to Aotea Square any day and you will see a short, feisty man shaking his fist at the world, his expression showing his determination to follow through on great plans for the city he served and loved. And maybe we can guess something of his despair that the greatest of his plans has failed to materialise.
Sir Dove-Meyer Robinson, the man of bronze, was Auckland's longest-serving mayor, holding the chains from 1959 to 1965 and from 1968 to 1980. Always a man of vision, his best known accomplishment was probably the Mangere Sewage System which serves us to this day.
Sadly, without a functioning circulation system, our city has had to grow higgledy piggledy, and we live with greedy roads eating up land, and cars and trucks unnecessarily polluting the atmosphere.
In the 1960s, De Leuw Cather recommended a bus-rail plan to be implemented by 1970 but this plan, too, was set aside by the National Government. And so the story goes on.
Here are some quotes from his records:
To this day, in spite of its potential, L A sprawls inefficiently without a heart, and is a gigantic user of natural resources, to say nothing of being a centre for crime. Neighbouring San Francisco, which grew up with trams and the Bay Area Rapid Transit System, BART, is an altogether more pleasant and efficient place to be.
There is no doubt, either, that he saw the development of railway services in New Zealand as the responsibility of the Government. If the Government doesn't step up, he says, "it is condemning part of its own assets to permanent disuse and wastage." And he foresaw a city "strangled with ... traffic chaos". Ask if our daily commuters if this is not true!
One thing that is often overlooked in the debate is that many of drawbacks and inefficiencies of our city would never have come to pass if Robbie and his allies had won the day. Auckland would be a different and better city if it had developed around his transport system, more compact efficient and a much cleaner and more pleasant and vibrant place to live.