There's skincare and then there's French skincare. That Made in Paris tag carries an allure that has women worldwide buying not just a product, but a promise of perfection.
The pretty packaging, fine fragrances and seductive advertising just add to the attraction. I've been hooked since I was 18, no doubt drawn in by too much dreaming over glossy magazines. If only I'd put all that money into a travel savings account, I'd have had enough trips to Paris to feel like a local. But then, if I didn't look like one, what would be the point?
Instead I have a beauty cupboard that looks like an outpost of French cosmetic retailer Sephora. Lancome mascara, Dior red lipstick, YSL foundation, Clarins body oil, Darphin eye gel, the list could go on and on. This is long-term self-indulgence on display, not just the perks of being a beauty editor - though exposure to even more products has hardly dimmed my enthusiasm. It helps that the French beauty industry is so inextricably linked to its fashion industry, making the pulling out of a black Chanel compact a, relatively, affordable style statement.
The French have cleverly synthesised many of skincare's key needs and trends with a focus on research into anti-ageing and the use of botanical ingredients. Throw in long-established traditions of self care, combined with regular professional treatments and it's no wonder the beauty regimes of French women are those others are judged by.
Critics say over-the-counter French products aren't generally natural enough, but for many fans the aromatic appeal of added fragrance is enticing. In the salon, active ingredients feature strongly, but often with a less clinical approach than some American lines. The overall effect is that many French treatments offer a sensory experience. French facials and body treatments, with their emphasis on massage to promote lymphatic drainage are worth seeking out from specialist skincare salons.
Today we've taken a broad sweep across recent releases from the best French brands, concentrating on cleansers, moisturisers, bodycare, perfume and cosmetics.

Good new multi-tasker for travel, this liquid cleanser is used for makeup removal for face and eyes and doesn't require rinsing off. It's a little astringent and best suits normal and combination skin, but has a softening after-effect from mallow extract. There's also a foaming cleanser for drier skin and both have a delicate floral perfume and handsome Chanel bottles.

This water-based cleanser lathers into a gentle foam to leave skin feeling fresh. Among the ingredients is licorice. Darphin's philosophy is that to look beautiful women need to feel beautiful also, which is why aromatic essences are incorporated into the products. (World Beauty Stores

Billed as a cellulite smoother, this is from a class of firming products which sells much more readily in Europe than here. Apply daily from ankles to waist in a bid to rub your troubles away. Plant ingredients combine with a silicon complex to leave a smoother looking skin surface and the idea is massage will help break down the wobbly bits. For the motivated, but this cream-gel does absorb well without greasiness.

This non-staining oil absorbs fast so can be applied after a shower immediately before dressing to ease tired muscles. Contains hazelnut oil to moisturise skin, with bitter orange and herbal essential oils lending a pleasant green aroma.

A range for younger women who want to start a serious skincare regime. NeoCalm will help combat stress and pollutants in those with drier skins. All ages can use Lancome's Genefique which works in combination across the brand's other age-appropriate ranges.

Dry skin will lap up this deeply nourishing, yet light cream, which helps reinforce the skin's barrier layer. Works to improve hydration and stimulate lipids with ceramides and essential fatty acids.