Most city councils will fine those who don't pick up after their dog "fouls". Though not often enough patrolled and enforced, respecting this is part of good dog ownership. So yes, as annoying as it gets, you do have to pick up after your dog every time. Even from a bush! And no, it's not more environmentally friendly to leave it there. Here's why.
Picking up your dog's number twos is more important that simply ensuring a clearway for people walking by. Your dog's excrement is a pollutant, and stormwater will carry it directly into waterways. It likely contains harmful bacteria, such as E.coli, Giardia, and Salmonella. If transmitted to other animals or humans by contaminated water or touch, it's dangerous stuff.
There's also a risk of dog excrement containing worms, which can live in soil for some time and later be transmitted to other animals and humans. Grossed out enough yet? Good. Buy one of those little bone-shaped plastic bag dispensers, attach it to your dog's lead, and never be without a little baggie.
And if you're really that eco-conscious, ensure you buy biodegradable bags such as SPCA's "ezebags". They are available at supermarkets.
Given that concert prices have skyrocketed in recent years ($500 for Madonna? Seriously?), please don't consider yourself a cheapskate for being tighter with your purse strings than some of your more well-heeled friends are. For some people, a night up close with Maroon 5 is worth three weeks' rent. For others, the experience is almost as good from the cheap seats that only set us back the cost of two large pizzas and an iTunes rental.
You don't want to get into the situation whereby your friend tries to buy you the better ticket, because that will only make you feel indebted and inferior. You also don't want to go to the concert together but sit separately. That removes the entire communal enjoyment factor of the event.
So, you really only have one option. General Admission tickets. GA "seating" is not seating at all; instead, you must stand up amongst the crowd and elbow your way to the best position. GA has three main benefits: price (usually it's cheapest of all ticketing), experience (nothing beats the feeling of community when squished amongst fellow music-lovers), and vantage point (if you're determined, you can get closer to the stage and the main act that any superior seat can).
Ask your friend if he or she is up for General Admission, and list the aforementioned benefits. Suggest you buy the first round of beer and make a real night of it. If they resist, just be straight up and tell them you can't afford the pricey ticket they want.
Both of you can then find other friends to go with, and you can all meet up afterwards and compare notes.
I admire your word choice by saying "tell him" instead of "ask him". It's your body. You can do with it whatever you want.
However, spouses have a duty to respect each other, talk to each other, and never intentionally hurt each other. If you know your husband hates tattoos and you go out and get one without his knowledge, you're sending him a clear message: mutual respect be damned. That will do nothing but harm to your relationship.
You should absolutely discuss your tattoo desires with your husband prior to getting inked. Tell him what you want, how long you've wanted it for, and what it means to you. Open a dialogue about his dislikes concerning body art, and if or how a tattoo would affect the way he feels about you.
As I said, it's your body. You don't need his permission. But think of it like buying a new car or adding on an extension to your house. There are things in life that both parties should agree on before go-ahead, because feelings get really hurt when affected people are not included in the decision-making process.
Do I really have to pick up after my dog everywhere? What if he goes in a bush, completely out of the way of where...