Two of China's National Champions are quickly rising up the ranks of the world's dairy companies. Riding China's dairy boom, Yili and Mengniu now rank as the 12th and 15th biggest earners in the dairy sector respectively after turning over a combined $12.2 billion in 2012. It's been a swift rise for the pair, neither of which figured on the Rabobank Global Dairy Top 20 rankings in 2008. Their rise up the rankings is set to continue as the Chinese Central Government-led consolidation programme gets into full swing. Just over an hour's flight from Beijing is Hohhot, the capital city of Inner Mongolia - an autonomous region in the north of China. Both Yili and Mengniu have their headquarters here in a region which contributes a substantial proportion of China's dairy production. Inner Mongolia is also set for a fiscal boost as the Government-sponsored dairy consolidation comes into full effect, with substantial investment in the capabilities and capacity of the two firms now under way. "For so many years, the only opposition that we have had is ourselves. In our 30-year history, we have tried everything we can to go beyond our self and to satisfy the needs of our customers, "says Liu Chun Hai, Vice-President of Yili Group. "Our core value is quality. Quality talks and that will never change. "For Yili Group, we [look at consolidation] this way; as the leading enterprise of the China dairy industry, what matters most is the well-being and development of the industry. We support every policy so long as it is a positive for the well-being of the industry." Paul Wang, vice-president of Mengniu Dairy Group adds: "The consolidation I think is going to be very good for dairy companies who have a certain skill level and capability to invest on the quality side, the system side and to benefit the government monitoring. There's so many small companies at present and it's not good for overall industry quality." Already Mengniu has been proactive in bringing international investors into its fold. French dairy producer Danone and European food group Arla are the company's second and third-largest shareholders. It's a mutually beneficial arrangement with Mengniu looking to leverage the experience and technical capabilities of Danone and Arla while they stake their claim on the second wave of the "White Gold Rush". "In China the farming business does not have the benefit of a long history, but in Europe they have done it for more than 150 years," says Wang. "They have a lot of experience accumulated, so we try to bring in those good ideas and experience to help us become a better company and build a better industry. "Mengniu is making every effort to increase our capability through cooperation with major international companies. They have very good experience and long histories in the dairy industry. We are very interested in co-operating with them and they are very open with us in terms of sharing their technology, food safety capability, new product development and advanced technical skill." The Inner Mongolian Government has signalled its support of one of the region's most important economic drivers. In 2009, 8 billion RMB was set aside to invest in the integration of the fragmented approach to dairy farming throughout the region. Inner Mongolia is home to more than three million dairy cows. When the policy implementation began more than 90 per cent of the region's cows were being raised by farmers in their backyards. A national-level laboratory was also setup to monitor products being produced by Mengniu and Yili.