Dr Trisia Farrelly doesn't want to be the glitter Grinch.
But the Massey University environmental anthropologist says we should think of the environment this Christmas, and do away with those trillions of tiny, shiny flecks we litter our lounges with.
Farrelly believed the Government could better its just-announced microbead ban and outlaw plastic-based glitter, which also posed a threat to marine life and human health.
Meanwhile, she said, we could make a difference by using biodegradable versions made from materials such as mica.
Farrelly has been researching and campaigning here for an end to single-use plastic supermarket bags, as well as microbeads in cosmetics and cleaning products, because they do not break down in the environment.
Like microbeads, which will be banned here and in the UK next year and have already been prohibited in the United States, plastic-based glitter is a form of microplastics.
A move by a UK nursery to ban glitter last month prompted a flurry of headlines, and Farrelly had since been quoted in major outlets such including BBC, CNN, the
She was surprised by the global interest in glitter as the plastic-based kind represented a relatively tiny part of the broader problem of global microplastics.
"But Christmas is an ideal time to raise awareness about environmentally responsible production and consumption and the problems associated with microplastics, and if plastic-based glitter is the vehicle for opening more conversations, then I welcome that."
Farrelly felt it was vital that discussion around plastic-based glitter pointed to the broader issues around plastic pollution.
"It's the fact that plastic production has increased 20-fold over the last 50 years so a very conservative eight million tonnes of plastics are estimated to enter the world's oceans every year, which eventually break down into microplastics," she said.
"We are now finding plastic in rain water, sea salt, and air. It's estimated that by 2050, 20 per cent of the global share of oil consumption will be dedicated to the production of plastic, by which time it is likely we will be seeing more plastic than fish by weight in the world's oceans."
In some parts of the world's oceans, microplastics now outnumbered plankton by six to one, she said.
"Plastic marine litter and the microplastics they break down into have been found to transport invasive species and more recently some marine scientists have reported that they also carry pathogens.
"And while a tiny percentage of the plastics produced are biodegradable — and even then, these only degrade under specific environmental conditions — the vast majority of plastics never go away and have been found in such far-flung places as the 10 kilometre-deep Mariana Trench."
Farrelly, who is based at Massey's School of People, Environment and Planning in Palmerston North, said plastic-based glitter was made of etched aluminium bonded to a plastic called PET (polyethylene terephthalate).
Her research is based on the findings of toxicologists and endocrinologists who study the effects of endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) found in many plastics, including PET.
"There is a growing body of evidence to suggest that the toxins released by micro-plastics and the additional pollutants absorbed by plastics in aquatic environments — what some marine scientists are now referring to as 'poison pills' — can bio-accumulate up the food chain with the potential to disrupt the endocrine systems of sea life, and us when we consume sea food."
Not wanting to take the sparkle out of festivities and celebrations, she said there were plenty of non-plastic, environmentally-friendly glitter alternatives that are available to make or buy.
But the onus must be on producer responsibility, she said, and the Government, too, could play a role.
Like microbeads, she believed PET glitter could be captured under Section 23 of New Zealand's Waste Minimisation Act.
But a Ministry for the Environment stated microplastics could not be banned in the same way as microbeads.
"Micro plastics in our environment and how they got there should be considered as part of a much broader conversation about plastic waste," a ministry spokesperson said.
"Raising awareness about environmentally responsible production and consumption and the problems associated with micro plastics is important and consumers can make a big impact through their choices."
Legislation encouraged product stewardship and environmental responsibility at the beginning of a product's life cycle, "which may be more effective than banning a huge range of products".
Kiwis generate 30 per cent more waste over the festive season, and our favourite holiday destinations see a four-fold increase in waste, according to the Packaging Forum.
We spend $6 billion on Christmas related shopping and gifts, with a massive increase in packaging and food consumption.
Drinks sales increase 300 per cent over normal levels and while recycling doubles, there's also a huge increase in recyclables that end up in landfills – especially when people are away from home.

Instead of plastic-based glitter, buy those made from minerals of make your own salt glitter. Swap tinsel for edible decorations and those made of recycled items.
Substitute it for Furoshiki, a type of traditional Japanese wrapping cloth, or newspaper, old comic book pages and maps, re-purposed knitwear or reusable Christmas bags.
Use crocheted water ballons instead. They're easy to make and there are plenty of tips and instructions online.
Drink from stainless steel and glass refillables, or directly from water fountains.
Living potted trees smell great and don't drop pine needles everywhere. Leave them outside until they've grown even more spectacular for the next year. Or make your own plastic free tree.