That piece of poetry is a quote from none other than Charlie Sheen, when he took to the internet for "Sheen's Korner" in 2011 - a short-lived webcast in which the actor shared all his thoughts and feelings. Specifically, about being fired from Two and a Half Men after a truly epic meltdown.
Sheen's very public implosion was all anyone - at least on the internet - could talk about for a solid month. Every day brought a new surprise and truly unfortunate consequences.
Now, it appears Sheen will be dominating the headlines again for weeks to come.
The actor has been identified by the National Enquirer and its sister gossip site Radar Online as the "mystery" Hollywood star who has HIV.
Immediately after that story broke, Sheen announced he would be doing a tell-all interview with the
And as that news quickly sunk in, Radar made another claim: Police will be investigating Sheen over allegations he slept with women while HIV-positive.
Sheen, 50, has a string of high-profile ex-wives and girlfriends, including Denise Richards and Brooke Mueller, and has boasted of sleeping with more than 5000 women.
"Charlie thought he was indestructible and took no precautions - even though he was indulging in high-risk sex practices," a friend was quoted as telling the
Radar Online executive editor Lachlan Cartwright told TV3 this morning that Sheen was in "financial ruin" - an amazing revelation because he was at one point the highest-paid actor on TV, making about US$1.8 million an episode when he was starring in the sitcom Anger Management.
He still makes millions from the syndication of that show and Two and a Half Men but Cartwright claimed that the star had paid at least US$5 million in legal fees and pay-outs to women he slept with while HIV-positive.
Cartwright said that the payouts would increase in light of the news "because more women, we are sure, are going to come forward, and then there will be this criminal probe where he potentially faces charges. So it's an extraordinary story. He spent the last three and a bit years covering it up and today the truth has come to light."
Sheen has frequently played up the stories the tabloids have written about his excesses. He has revelLed in his image of the star Hollywood can't control, a party animal who drops "truth bombs" on a world that can't handle his wild ways.
The fact that he is the son of Martin Sheen, a devout Catholic who is best known for playing the president liberal America always wished it had, has only added to his "mythic" status.
The latest revelations, however, if true, will be hard to shake off. Hollywood is a forgiving town - Sheen's multiple comebacks have proved that - but this may be the last straw, especially if he has knowingly harmed people.
But it is worth remembering that he has weathered a lot of storms. Here are just a few of them.




After Sheen is hospitalised again, he announces he's going to rehab, and will complete the programme in his own house (which he calls the "Sober Valley Lodge"). Two and a Half Men is put on hiatus, with 16 out of 24 episodes filmed for the eighth season.





Sheen sends a letter to TMZ, raging about the show being shut down: "I gracefully ignored this folly for 177 shows ... I fire back once and this contaminated little maggot can't handle my power and can't handle the truth. I wish him nothing but pain in his silly travels especially if they wind up in my octagon."













- With the Washington Post