In this age of
But the reality is that we continue to live in a business-as-usual world. Our media is filled with enthusiastic announcements about
In Australia, the disconnect among our political leaders on the deadly nature of fossil fuels is particularly breathtaking.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison continues to
In the past, many of us have tolerated such pronouncements as the utterings of idiots – in the true,
Each year the situation becomes more critical. In 2018, global emissions of greenhouse gases
No climate report or warning, no political agreement nor technological innovation has altered the ever-upward trajectory of the pollution. This simple fact forces me to look back on my
Many climate scientists think we are already so far down the path of destruction that it is
And on the other side of that threshold, nature's
That future Earth may have enough resources to support
My children, and those of many prominent polluters and climate denialists, will probably live to be part of that
How should Australia's parents deal with those who labour so joyously to create a world in which a large portion of humanity will perish? As I have become ever more furious at the polluters and denialists, I have come to understand they are threatening my children's well-being as much as anyone who might seek to harm a child.
Young people themselves are now mobilising against the danger. Increasingly they're giving up on words, and resorting to actions.
Its
Not yet a year old, Extinction Rebellion has had an enormous impact. In April it
So unstable is our current societal response that a single young woman,
On September 20 in Australia and elsewhere, school principals must decide whether they will allow their students to
I will be marching with the strikers in Melbourne, and I believe teachers should join their pupils on that day. After all, us older generation should be painfully aware that our efforts have not been enough to protect our children.
The new and carefully planned rebellion by the young generation forces us earlier generations of climate activists to re-examine our strategy. Should we continue to use words to try to win the debate? Or should we become climate rebels? Changing the language around climate denialism will, I hope, sharpen our focus as we ponder what comes next.
•