Hi Mark, thanks for your question.
Unfortunately, acne has become
Interestingly, acne is almost unheard of in traditional hunter-gatherer societies.
Natural treatment of acne addresses the lifestyle factors at the root of an acne problem.
There is
The first step in resolving acne is to adopt a diet based on real whole foods, consisting of plenty of vegetables, fruits, whole unrefined grains such as brown rice and oats, legumes, nuts and seeds, and good quality protein such as eggs, chicken, fish and lean meat. Keep sugary foods, refined carbohydrates and processed food to a minimum, or better still, eliminate entirely.
You may also like to consider limiting your consumption of dairy products. Some
Specific plant medicines can also help speed the healing process. Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale) is one of the oldest healing plants and often the herbalist's first choice for acne. Traditional medicine classes Dandelion as a depurative, a plant that has purifying and detoxifying effects. Dandelion is bitter to the taste, which helps to increase the flow of digestive juices, enhancing appetite and assisting with the proper breakdown of food. Its action on the liver supports the metabolism of toxins, wastes, pollutants, inflammatory by-products and hormones, resulting in less overall load on the liver, and clearer skin.
Other fantastic medicinal plants that can support skin cleansing include St Mary's Thistle (Silybum marianum) and Globe Artichoke (Cynara scolymus). Like Dandelion, these plants were traditionally used to protect, strengthen and detoxify the digestive organs and liver, supporting assimilation and elimination. More recently, St Mary's Thistle
Acne sufferers can make use of these natural allies by consuming them daily as a herbal tea. Bitter, liver-supporting herbs are best taken before meals, especially first thing in the morning before breakfast. Between 2-3 cups daily is recommended for people working to improve skin concerns, and then 1 cup daily in an ongoing manner as maintenance once the skin has cleared up.
I wish you the best of luck in finding a holistic and effective solution to your skin concerns. If this condition worsens or does not improve, please see your leading healthcare professional.

Adebamowo, C., Spiegelman, D., Danby, F., Frazier, A., Willett, W., & Holmes, M. (2005). High school dietary dairy intake and teenage acne.
Cordain, L., Lindeberg, S., Hurtado, M., Hill, K., Eaton, S., & Brand-Miller, J. (2002). Acne vulgaris: a disease of Western civilization.
Melnik, B. (2012). Diet in acne: further evidence for the role of nutrient signalling in acne pathogenesis.
Sahib, A., Al-Anbari, H., Salih, M., Abdullah, F. (2012). Effects of Oral Antioxidants on Lesion Counts Associated with Oxidative Stress and Inflammation in Patients with Papulopustular Acne.