Wairarapa residents took to the highway by foot on Saturday to raise awareness about climate change.
The 36km march, which started in Featherston and finished in Masterton, gained momentum and numbers as it passed through Greytown and Carterton.
"It was really encouraging going through the towns with the number of people who were joining in with prams and their kids," said one of the organisers, Chris Peterson, a Masterton District councillor.
Geared with placards and high-vis vests, 20 marchers and two dogs embarked from Featherston at 7am.
Tens of thousands of people took part in similar marches around the world as leaders gather in Paris to finalise climate change agreements.
"It was a case of doing something locally to raise awareness and encourage people to join the worldwide demonstration to encourage politicians and world leaders to be bold and ambitious at the Paris talks," said Mr Peterson, chairman of MDC environment task group.
Masterton Mayor Lyn Patterson met the march, which had ballooned to "50 or 60" protesters, at the finish line -- Masterton Town Square.
Former mayor Frank Cody, who is in his 80s, walked the last leg of the march from the outskirts of Masterton.
Mr Peterson said the three Wairarapa mayors had been "very supportive" and had all signed the New Zealand declaration on climate change.
The placards were made by the other three march organisers -- Mike Robinson, his wife Sue and Dennis Johnson.
"Some walked right through from Featherston to Masterton but a lot of people came and went as their energies ebbed and flowed," said Mr Robinson.
Mrs Robinson said there was an "amazing feeling of solidarity" on the march and the group had received "excellent responses" from drivers.
"We have to commend them as they coped with the intrusion in good spirits," she said.
Mr Robinson said a lot of effort had gone into making the highway march safe for people.
There was a van with signs and flashing lights at either end of the march, and Fulton Hogan supplied a driver and vehicle, which had directional lights to pre-warn traffic of the march taking place.
Mr Robinson said the protesters globally were "saying to their governments please set some meaningful targets and please adhere to them".
It was about lessening the effects of polluting the atmosphere, he said.
"The system that we are currently using is wrong and we must seek a new way.
"Consumerism is using up the world's natural resources and is contributing to pollution."
Former Green Party candidate and Wairarapa farmer John Hart said people had turned out to climate change marches all over the country.
"I think it's a signal that people are taking climate change seriously and they do expect our leaders to do the same.
"Most of the people I spoke to were marching out of frustration because we're taking such an unambitious target to Paris for the negotiations."