The future of the polluted Mangatarere Stream will be pulled sharply into focus next month when a public meeting is held to discuss how best to clean it.
The Mangatarere is a major tributary of the Waiohine River, which in turn flows into the Ruamahanga River, Wairarapa's largest waterway.
However, the stream has long suffered from the discharge of treated municipal wastewater, fertiliser run-off, piggery and dairy effluent. It was described in a Greater Wellington Regional Council report as having "high concentrations of dissolved nutrients and E coli bacteria".
Carterton Mayor Ron Mark said the long-term goal was nil discharge into the stream and the meeting on December 14 would be a good starting point.
"The challenge is how do we get there pragmatically and realistically together," the mayor said. "We want a plan that everybody can commit to and that may need us to be a little more patient, and others of us to accept that change is inevitable."
He said there were parts of the stream that were pristine but other stretches contained unacceptable levels of pollutants.
"There is a degree of urgency and the Carterton council has no desire to continue discharging into the stream," he said.
"I would like to think we would get to an agreement sooner rather than later."
Members of iwi, the farming community, Greater Wellington, Carterton District Council, and Wairarapa Public Health will be represented at the meeting.
Kahungunu Ki Wairarapa representative Ra Smith said a number of political hurdles had already been jumped to get to the discussion stage.
"There's been a little bit of frustration because a lot of people wanted to get on this and make it happen," Mr Smith said. But progress was encouraging.
"And the encouraging thing is that the public response - whatever that is - will be straight from the horse's mouth, so to speak," Mr Smith said.
Carterton representative, Councillor Jill Greathead, said the issue affected many residents.
"Every time urban residents flush their toilets, it goes into the wastewater system, which eventually after treatment finds itself in the Mangatarere," she said.
The meeting is open to the public and will be held at 7.30pm on December 14, at the Carterton Events Centre in Holloway St. RSVP to 06 379 6717 or jill.greathead@cdc.govt.nz.