I have always found long-term goals fun to set.
The Government's announcement yesterday of wanting 90 percent of rivers and lakes swimmable by 2040 is almost a rehash of me at 18 wanting to become a millionaire. To be fair, it has slightly more of a plan on how it is going to reach its goal. But, in saying that, it's also making it easier on itself by shifting the goalposts - the equivalent of me deciding $100,000 is pretty much a million.
Ninety percent of rivers and lakes swimmable. What part of that doesn't sound good? None of it until you realise what the Government considers "swimmable".
In the Government's National Policy Statement for Freshwater Management 2014, for a body of water (be it a river or lake) to get an 'A' rating, it has to have rates of E. Coli (the bacteria that gives us campylobacter), less than or equal to, 260cfu/100mL, 95 per cent of the time. It used to be 99 per cent A reading above 260cfu/100mL means there is certain risk to human health.
Setting easily achievable goals is a great way to feel good about yourself. Setting easily achievable goals that don't need to be achieved for 23 years, well, that borders on pointless. I've racked my brain trying to think if there is anyone other than politicians who spit this sort of nonsense. Alas, I came up with nothing.
Long story short, the Government's current plan to "clean up our waterways" is absolute rubbish. It's an attempt to look as though it is taking action, when in reality it is doing absolutely nothing. In fact, in many cases, going backwards. It's electioneering at its best. Don't fall for it. Since 2014 councils are no longer required to extensively test our waterways, instead, a waterways health is now determined on a measly three points. (E. Coli, Nitrates and Phosphorus).
Given that water is such an integral part of all life, and our economy (from agriculture to tourism), you'd really think we'd all be on board to protect what isn't already stuffed, and clean up what is. I feel the general populace wants action, and wants action now. It's just the Government that seems to be lacking interest. Unfortunately, it seems if the current lot stay on their projected trajectory, I will be a millionaire, retired, and sunning myself by the pool, before anything is seriously done about any of our filthy lakes and rivers.