In the last of the questions before this year's election, we asked the Wanganui Chronicle readers' panel what they thought the main issues facing the country were, and what party they thought presented the best solutions to those issues.
Issue 1 - the MMP referendum.
While this will not solve any of the immediate problems facing the country it will make a great deal of difference to future parliaments, and thus to the long-term future of our democracy. I will support MMP because:
- It has delivered a more representative Parliament
- It has facilitated the development of smaller parties
- It is much less vulnerable to gerrymandering
- It guarantees that the Government will represent a majority of the people of New Zealand
- It is more likely to foster consensus politics
- It has the ability, through the list system, to bring non-politicians into Parliament
- It guarantees that no matter how true blue or bright red is the electorate in which you live, your vote for your  preferred party will still count
- It allows you to vote for a good electorate MP without necessarily supporting the policies of his/her party
Issue 2 - falling levels of participation.
We only need to look at the bloodshed, pain and fear, not to mention the enormous economic cost, being suffered in the likes of Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, and Syria in order to effect regime change, to appreciate that democracy's ability to continue or change the leadership of a country without civil strife may well be one of mankind's most laudable social developments.
In our democracy, who you vote for is your free and secret choice, but the act of voting is your duty. No matter who you vote for, please vote this election.
We are living in a changing world. Our population is increasing rapidly, but resources are running out and becoming more expensive.
The real issue therefore is, are we going to look backwards and sell our assets in order to carry on as usual, or look ahead to the changes that have to be made?
Are we going to vote for a conservative party like National, which pretends we can carry on the way we are by selling our assets, exploiting and polluting the environment, agreeing to the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), relaxing our regulations around genetic engineering and so we lose more and more control over our sovereignty?
Or are we going to face the future and do our best to make New Zealand resilient enough to have the skills and necessary conditions in place to be able to look after our environment and our people?
I favour the second option and therefore my vote will go to the Green Party.
They look for long-term solutions, by cleaning up the environment, keeping businesses and jobs in New Zealand (like the building of the rail wagons that could have happened in Dunedin), providing green jobs and keeping out of the TPP agreement.
Good luck to New Zealand's future.
You can be part of it!
For me, there are two main issues which are both connected.
To build a strong economy:
National's policies see us borrowing less and balancing the books sooner, however I am greatly against asset sales. A way needs to be found to create wealth without selling our birthright.
Reducing poverty: I can see the value of Labour's plans to remove the GST on fruit and vegetables and raise the minimum wage. Overall though I am impressed with the Conservative Party's emphasis on the family. Policies that support families to improve their own situations through work and education will ultimately reduce dependence on the welfare system.
I see possibly the major issues facing the country as external borrowing and internal savings, with both major parties purporting to have the answer but really telling us nothing.
Other major issues are the sale of assets, with no one being able to tell us what happens after the money from such sales is spent, and to what extent it will inflate prices (electricity).
History has shown that prices will rise.
Trade training: with a decade or more of decline in trade opportunity employment for young people, anything now is possibly too little too late, although welcome.
Review of MMP: as it is a non-binding referendum I only see changes occurring if our politicians see it as being beneficial to them. I believe this type of referendum should be binding on Parliament.
Education: A system which measures results should be introduced.
With the review of social welfare, the talk of eliminating the Maori Seats, ACC review and superannuation review, the issues are far-reaching. There is something for everyone, and I guess, like always, designed to lure voters to the major parties.
With regard to what the parties have to offer, I think the minor parties have some admirable philosophy, with innovative ideas, particularly the Conservatives and the Greens. Peter Dunne and the United Future party have always been steadfast in their ideals.
In an MMP environment, having coalition partners with differing ideals and ideas reflecting the views of the people is healthy and democratic, and goes some way towards keeping the major parties honest.