•
If we want to know whether there is life beyond Earth then the quickest way to answer that question is to explore Mars. That exploration is currently being done by remote space probes sent from Earth.
The race is on though to send human explorers to Mars and a number of Earth-bound projects are trying to
But the notion of any
The first suggestion is pointless and unethical - we would be sending astronauts to their certain death - while the second would be a licence for us to continue polluting our home planet.
I believe we should go to Mars because of what we can learn from the red planet, and from developing the technologies to get people there safely.
The SpaceX entrepreneur Elon Musk last September outlined his vision for a
Fly me to the moon ... Ok
I think Musk will send two space tourists around the Moon and back to Earth,
It's worth looking at how we got to where we are now in terms of humans in space and space exploration.
The first footprint on another world was made by US astronaut
The Moon is as far as humans have explored in space but we've sent probes to explore the other planets in our Solar system, including Mars.
Several failed attempts were made
The USSR's
NASA's
The Viking missions were the first to search for life on that planet, since when others such as the
No evidence of life has been found so far, but the techniques available now are far more advanced and we know much more about the planet. We do have abundant evidence of
Apart from looking for life, why bother with a mission to send humans to Mars? Many aspects of our modern lives would not be possible if it were not for our interest in space.
We rely on
The Apollo and other NASA missions led to
NASA has
Intangible, but critical nonetheless, is the inspiration we derive from space exploration. It can be very significant in attracting young people to science and engineering, something needed more and more as our economies continue to transition to an ever higher-tech future.
In the US there was a
We are using more and more sophisticated craft to explore Mars. It is a broadly international venture involving
We are witnessing not only collaboration but competition. Which nation (or company?) will first return to the Moon and then land astronauts on Mars? It is beginning to look like a new space race.
Why focus on Mars? We already know that early in its history,
Life on Earth then was microbial, the evidence for which is
So we are searching for
If there ever was life on Mars it may still be there, underground where it will be protected from cosmic and ultraviolet radiation. From time to time it might emerge on the surface in some of the gullies that seem to result from the breaching of underground aquifers.
It might not seem exciting to discover former or living microbes, but if we can demonstrate that they represent an independent origin of life the consequences will be profound.
We will be able to predict confidently that there will be life all over the universe. Somewhere out there will be intelligent beings. What might happen then currently lies in the realm of science fiction.