They may look pretty in our garden but scientists say we can reap plenty of health benefits from plants by bringing them inside.
Experts have long preached the benefits of house plants, and scientists are now saying that popping greenery on your bedside table can boost your sleep and health.
Plants reduce stress, anxiety, and help remove airborne pollutants, the
Elle Decor and The Joy of Plants delved into research from Nasa and the American College to determine which houseplants are best suited to your bedroom - and the benefits they provide.

Madagascan areca palm leads the way in efficiency at "mopping up" pollutants.
Researchers say the palm is brilliant for anyone prone to colds and sinus problems because it releases moisture into the air. This, in turn, makes it much easier to breathe so will help you nod off quicker.

Why? It releases oxygen continuously throughout the night, making it an ideal bedroom addition. It also fights benzene, which is found in detergents and plastics, and formaldehyde (in varnishes and floor finishes) so helps keep the air super pure.

Indeed, researchers at the American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology found that English ivy in particular removes 78 per cent of airborne mould in just 12 hours.



The best part about it is that it removes more toxins as time and exposure continues.




City dwellers today spend an average 90 per cent of their time inside - but experts from the Royal Horticultural Society say that "bringing the outdoors inside" can recreate some of the natural benefits lost in the process.
Plants reduce stress levels, improve mood and filter polluted air, they say.
A review of the scientific evidence suggests that workers are more productive when their office is filled with greenery - and hospital patients are even thought to tolerate pain better if there is a plant on the ward.
Perhaps most importantly, plants also trap and filter pollutants that are linked to thousands of deaths a year.
Writing in the horticultural journal the