Nearly 30 months after the
Many will recall that the momentous occasion of the shipwreck became a political issue during the election lead-up in late 2011, but few would have guessed that it would still be in discussion now.
Owners of the
The ridiculous thing is that there was insurance in place to cover it, the Swedish Club can certainly afford it. If New Zealand decides to make them remove the wreck (as they are required to) they will pay and just pass on the loss to their ultra-wealthy members through their premiums.
They have paid big bucks to contract consultants to create a spin on the situation and have even offered a quiet settlement package of up to $38 million, with over $10 million being contingent on them being able to leave their rubbish under the water.
This has
The whole situation angers me too.
On board the ship, there were at least two forty-foot containers full of plastic resin pellets. These are the raw materials that we import into New Zealand to extrude into plastic products. As
But unless you live on one of the East Coast beaches and had a careful look at the high tide line, you might not know that
Many thousands of resin pellets are still on East Coast beaches from the first container that spilled - you will find them if you look carefully along the high tide line.
But there is still a whole 40-foot container full of resin pellets on the twisted wreck of the Rena and they want to leave it down there. Along with many other harmful materials inside the wreck, the container will inevitably rust away. Long after the foreign owners have gone back to their Medditeranean mansions, tonnes of plastic pellets - that look just like fish eggs - will be released into our marine environment to be consumed by fish that we are out there catching for dinner.
As I continue to say time and again, if we eat fish that have consumed persistent organic pollutants then we are poisoning ourselves, but this time, it is not because of our own littering, it is because the vastly wealthy shipping industry doesn't want to pay for it to be removed.
Their consent application comes even after the Managing Director of The Swedish Club
It is absurd that they would contend that plastic resin pellets, which are proven to be packed full of toxic chemicals are not classed as pollution. As far as I know, they have conveniently left this problem out of their consent application, describing it as only a visual nuisance. If you look carefully at the header photo in
In their consent application, they have consistently said that it is a dangerous operation to remove the wreck - which is at a depth of 65 metres - but have ironically promoted leaving it there to create a diving attraction. Now although a salvage operation is very different from recreational diving, I have been diving for more than 20 years and I know that going down to more than 60 metres is very dangerous for recreational divers. I would be worried that under-experienced divers would push themselves beyond their limits just to get down deep enough to see it.
It is also very clear that although it will be costly, history tells us that if those who are insured are made to pay, that
It all comes down to whether we want to let the big-wigs from overseas make ridiculous excuses and leave their polluted, oily rubbish at the bottom of our ocean, or stand up to them and make them get their mess out of here.
Everyone will have the chance to make a submission when the resource consent gets lodged, but in the meantime, I would love to hear what you think about this - so please leave a comment below.