In the coming month, the Land and Water Forum (LAWF) will make recommendations to the Government on how to implement a new world of "limits".
The notion of "limits" was first introduced in the LAWF report of 2010. It proposed without limits it would be impossible to deal with the effects of water takes on one hand and the cumulative effect of discharges on the other.
This theme was taken up in the National Policy Statement: Freshwater Management (NPS) in 2011. A key purpose of the NPS is to set enforceable quality and quantity limits.
Limits on quantity are not new. Be it groundwater or surface water, there is a limit to how much can be taken without "running the river dry". The same concept is now being applied to water quality.
There is a limit to the amount of pollutants that waterbodies can absorb, before having detrimental effects on the waterway and the life within it. But how much is too much? How do we decide? And who decides? And what are our aspirations for clean water?
Across the 50-plus stakeholders in the LAWF process, which includes hydro generators, municipals, white water rafters and farmers, everyone has a slightly different answer to these questions, although we all agree on the direction of travel. The challenge is to try to find the common ground.
Federated Farmers water and environment spokesperson, Ian Mackenzie, is a member of the LAWF "Small Group", an inner circle of key stakeholders, who are currently shaping recommendations to Government on these critical questions.
A key area of common ground is that the collaborative model must be carried forward at all levels of water policy; national, regional and local. Players should put their cards on the table at the beginning, rather than squaring off in the Environment Court at the end of the process.
Another area of agreement is we are all in this together, town and country.
Where limits are set, they should apply to urban streams, as they do to rural streams.
If we are already "over the limit", do we all have to stop dead in our tracks? If we're facing irreversible damage, perhaps we should. However, more often what will be required is very careful consideration of the costs of change, the risks to the wider economy and society, and a steady transition to new ways of operating, holding soil on the hills and nutrients on the land.
While a first set of recommendations will be made shortly, a full and final report on "managing limits" will be prepared later in the year.