"They took all the trees, put 'em in a tree museum" went Joni Mitchell's 1970 song
Forty-five years later, scientists have warned that urban nature might not be replaced with museums, but digital equivalents such as images and sound recordings.
This virtual replacement of nature has been listed as a potential future threat to city ecosystems, along with some other possibilities as surprising as cremation ashes, drones - and even energy-efficient homes.
"We don't want to throw the baby out with the bathwater - some of these new technologies bring a range of environmental benefits," Dr Margaret Stanley said.
"But clever solutions are going to be needed to mitigate threats to urban biodiversity if we are to maintain our connection with nature as we become increasingly urbanised."
With her colleagues at Auckland University's School of Biological Sciences, Dr Stanley brought together experts from Australia, the UK and New Zealand to identify current trends and new technologies that pose the biggest threat to urban ecosystems.
Their study, published in the journal
Dr Stanley told the
In another example, greenery was being removed to make parks and other places because of safety and security issues.
The research follows another major study, authored by Dr Stanley and published earlier this year, which showed central Auckland was losing what urban tree cover it had.
Across the isthmus, the amount of tree cover was just 6 per cent, and of that, 63 per cent of the trees were on private land and 15 per cent - few of them native - were protected.
The loss ran against international studies finding how plenty of green spaces in cities could improve the health of pregnant women, speed up recovery times among hospital patients and cut the use of anti-depressants.
They also sucked hundreds of tonnes of pollution from the environment each year, reduced stormwater run-off, and served as crucial "wild-links" that helped birds and pollinators move between food sources and habitats.
In August, the Herald investigated potential solutions to the wider threats that faced New Zealand's largest city, as part of its World Class Auckland series.

As more people are encouraged to use green urban spaces for exercise, these spaces could become highly maintained for people rather than wildlife; with more tracks, artificial lighting and fewer plants.

This gives people some of the benefits of nature, but without the maintenance and messy side of nature, however, it could lead to city dwellers undervaluing nature in their immediate environment.

However, in some cities land for interring "cremains" has become very expensive and scattering cremains has become more culturally acceptable.
Because of high levels of phosphate and calcium in cremains, there is a risk of polluting urban ecosystems and waterways.