A Bay dairy farm company has been fined $72,200 for the unlawful discharge of dairy effluent which ended up in a Maketu stream.
Armer Farms (NI) Ltd was sentenced in Tauranga District Court yesterday by Judge Robert Wolff after it pleaded guilty on May 31 to a charge that it permitted a contaminant to be discharged on to land which may result in it entering water.
The maximum penalty for this offence under the Resource Management Act for a corporate body is a fine not exceeding $600,000.
The directors of Armer Farms are Fonterra director Colin Armer and his wife, Dale, however, they were not charged because they did not have day-to-day responsibility over the farm.
At the time of the offence, Armer Farms was the lessee of a farm property at Bledisloe Park Ave, Maketu, which employed a farm manager and three farmhands, milking about 540 cows.
The farm lease expired on May 31.
The illegal discharge occurred on or about October 11, 2010, after an irrigation pipe split and dairy effluent ponded in a paddock, subsequently flowing across land into an unnamed stream.
The stream travels through other properties below the dairy farm before emerging at Newdicks Beach - although there was no evidence that discharge reached the beach.
The prosecution was brought against the company by Bay of Plenty Regional Council after complaints by local residents Jill Phare and Carol Poihipi.
On October 10, 2010, Mrs Phare noticed the stream flowing past her house was murky and smelled of cow effluent when it was normally clear and by the next day the stream was in a worse condition, and she could smell the stink from her house.
She noticed the effluent was flowing downstream in the direction of Newdicks Beach. Mrs Poihipi, chairwoman of the Maketu Community Board, also became aware of discharge when she asked Mrs Phare whether she could collect some watercress from the stream.
By the time the regional council staff arrived on the scene the section of pipe which had split had been replaced and a bund put in place to prevent further pollution.
The court was told that the same pipe had split two weeks earlier and also been repaired.
Sentencing took place following a disputed facts hearing on Friday which centred around legal arguments over the severity and duration of adverse environmental affects.
Council pitched it as moderate to severe; the company suggested it was only up to moderate.
Council's lawyer Adam Hopkinson argued that the evidence was clear that when the discharge occurred there was "no safety net or back-up plan" for the farm staff.
Regular close-up checks to ensure the $72,000 fine for dairy farm's effluent discharge
mobile irrigator was working properly would have revealed the problem much earlier, and a significant fine was required to send a deterrent message, he said.
But Armer Farms (NI) Ltd lawyer Matthew Casey QC argued that the discharge had been a one-off "untoward, unexpected event" and described the two splits in the same pipe in two weeks as being like "lightening striking twice" in the same place.
Mr Casey said once the leak was discovered by the farm manager he had taken prompt action, and the irrigation system had since been upgraded and more staff training undertaken.
Judge Wolff said in his view the discharge was not a one-off but evidence of a systematic failure.
"The discharge itself was as a result of a split pipe. But the primary cause was Armer Farms (NI) Ltd's failure to adequately ensure that it had a system for checking the irrigator was working properly, and ensure any damage from a discharge was picked up much earlier than it was."
Judge Wolff ordered 90 per cent of the fine be paid to the regional council.
He also ordered the company to pay $113 solicitor costs and $132.89 for court costs.
Outside court, Mrs Phare said she was relieved that after 16 months the company had finally acknowledged its environmental pollution, and she hoped the prosecution sent a clear message this sort of pollution must not happen again.
"I also hope it encourages more people to speak up about it when they see this sort of illegal discharge," she said.
Nick Zaman, the regional council's pollution prevention manager, told the Bay of Plenty that he hoped this prosecution would send a message not just to farmers but to all farm workers that they must take their environmental responsibilities seriously.
"While we would prefer that there were no prosecutions at all, we do hope today's sentence serves as a reminder ... that the courts, council and the wider community, will not tolerate the pollution of our environment."