On taking office, Len Brown asked the Office of the Mayor to prepare a set of measures that would monitor progress against his vision -- To Create the World's Most Liveable City.
These measures sat within four broad areas that Auckland needed to address if it was to have an internationally-competitive quality of life. The results are outlined below:
Educational Achievement (percentage achieving NCEA Level 1 Literacy and Numeracy)
This is considered a minimum level of literacy and is internationally comparable under the OECD PISA system. Auckland's performance has improved over the 5-year period from 2009-14. (Source: Ministry of Education)


This is an indicator of "at risk youth". It measures the percentage of 15 to 24 year olds who are not in education, employment, or training. (Source: Department of Statistics)


There has been a substantial and steady reduction in crimes reported to Auckland's three police districts since 2010. (Source: NZ Police)


This measures the number of incidents of graffiti reported to Auckland Council and removed by Councils contractors each year. Rapid removal of graffiti is intended to discourage repeat offers and reduce the frequency of this anti-social behaviour. Note: data has only been available for the three years from July 2012 to June 2015


This compares Auckland's average household income/average house price ratio with the national average (set at 100). Auckland's housing affordability has deteriorated compared with the national average. (Source: Massey University)

Housing supply (number of new dwelling consents)
Measures the number of new dwelling consents lodged with Auckland Council each year. The logic is that there is a very close relationship between consents lodged and dwelling completions. Consents lodged have more than doubled since 2010.


For reducing congestion on the region's roads, facilitating more concentrated employment in major employment areas and reducing the per-capita investment in required transport infrastructure, a greater uptake of public transport is needed. Public transport patronage growth is well ahead of forecasts.


Local and national cycling experts have repeatedly told Auckland Council that to increase the number of commuters, school children and recreational cyclists, investment in safe dedicated cycleways is needed. Cycleway investment has improved markedly since 2010 and is budgeted to significantly increase further.


Time lost to congestion lowers economic productivity and the quality of life of road users. It is the primary factor holding Auckland back from achieving even higher scores in international liveability surveys. Various traffic management investments have seen congestion drop in Auckland over recent years. Population and economic growth, however, is likely to make such reductions unsustainable. (Source: NZTA)


Operating expenditure on local includes the costs of operating and maintaining the local (non-state highway) road network, as well as the costs of borrowing for new infrastructure. Auckland requires investment in an efficient road-based transport network for growing freight and people movements, as well as a corridor for utilities. (Source: Auckland Council)


GDP is a measure of the value of economic activity (production or expenditure) within a set of borders within a period of time. It is a guide to whether an economy is growing or not. GDP per capita is an important measure for an economy that is also experiencing population change. For example, if population growth is higher than GDP growth, it suggests that production or expenditure per person is shrinking. Auckland's GPD per capita is growing.


Employment data indicates whether Auckland is creating jobs fast enough to deal with population growth and the resulting number of people entering the workforce. If employment growth is not sufficiently strong, unemployment will rise.


There is a range of income statistics. Weekly personal income is one that is measured across all income sources, people easily relate to it and it is readily available from Statistics NZ

Commercial Accommodation (total guest nights)
Commercial accommodation provides a measure of both the health of the visitor/tourism economy and the degree to which Auckland business connects to the rest of New Zealand and the world. Growth in guest nights, high occupancy rates and consents for large hotel investments suggest this part of Auckland's economy is doing very well.


Diesel and petrol sales are used as a proxy for overall greenhouse gas emissions and represent a source of such emissions over which Council has influence through its transport investments. An example is the recent investment in electric trains. (Source: Local Authority Fuel Tax Data)


Auckland Council carries out regular testing of beaches and marine areas around the Auckland Region. This measure shows the percentage of tested areas showing fair to excellent water quality over multiple tests.


Like marine areas, the region's streams are also frequently tested for organic and inorganic contaminants.


Regular sampling of air quality is performed around the region, particularly urban areas. Soot-like particle measures have been chosen because they are a particular health risk and as a proxy for a broader range of air born pollutants.