A national requirement for all water bodies to be swimmable all of the time is "impractical", Environment Minister Dr Nick Smith says.
But environmental groups have accused the Government of dodging tougher limits to address the country's freshwater woes.
In a
Most of the country's rivers breached the 540 E. coli count required for swimming during heavy rainfall, he said, and there were water bodies home to many birds whose E. coli made it impossible to meet the swimming standard without a massive bird cull.
"There are also rivers associated with geothermal activity that makes water quality unsuitable for swimming," he told the gathering.
"We also need to be open about the cost of our regulatory requirements on communities and the fact that many water bodies have long hydrological cycles that mean it is a long time before we see improvement."
Standards under the Government's
Smith said the Government was open to strengthening the national requirements on swimmability and had the Land and Water Forum working on options, he said.
"A lot of work is going into understanding the proportion of time our waterbodies meet the E. coli standards for swimming and how we can ensure it is improved."
Previous reports have shown around two-thirds of monitored freshwater sites in the country remain unsafe for recreational contact.
However, Smith said New Zealand's freshwater was "generally good" by international standards and added it was difficult from hard data to draw simple overall conclusions on freshwater quality.
Trends varied significantly from river to river, it took years of data to make meaningful comparisons and quality was measured by different indicators.
"The best summary I would give of the data on overall fresh water quality throughout New Zealand is that bacterial contamination and macroinvertebrates are unchanged during the past 25 years, dissolved phosphorus is improving and nitrate levels are generally deteriorating," he said.
The worst water quality was in urban areas but these are comparatively small in total area, while the most significant declines were in more intensively farmed areas and were caused by minimum flows being too low and levels of nutrients or sediment being too high, he said.
"The good news on water quality is that our systems for dealing with point sources of pollution under the Resource Management Act (RMA) are generally working well.
"There has been a huge reduction in pollution entering our lakes and rivers from dairy sheds, factories and town effluent systems, and billions has been spent on upgrades."
The Government had several clear policy views on how to improve freshwater management, he said, including a stronger national direction and more collaboration between parties.
"I do not buy the rhetoric that farmers are environmental vandals and environmentalists and recreationists are economic imbeciles."
By 2030, he wanted the Government's freshwater reforms to have resulted in consistent data showing rivers, lakes and aquifers were cleaner and healthier, an agricultural sector using water and nutrients more efficiently and the community understanding the value of rivers and lakes.
Smith also commented on the gastro outbreak in Havelock North that left thousands of residents sick, calling it "a serious failure on which there are many tough questions that will need to be answered".
"The GNS data showing the infected water was less than a year old in an aquifer source where it should be more than 50 suggests a localised surface water breach of the well's integrity, but we should be cautious of drawing conclusions ahead of the independent inquiry."
"Water is something many of us take for granted, yet clean, safe drinking water is key to healthy lifestyles," Rohfritsch said.
"I can't wait to share this message with a generation of young Kiwis on my journey through your beautiful country in my quest for change to be made to help combat the global water crisis."
KPMG has also just
The accountancy firm's executive chairman, Ross Buckley, said the report examined the impact our growing population would have on our natural water resources, and made a call to consolidate water management.
"We are fortunate to have a plentiful supply of water, and while we are not immune from water challenges, it is beholden to us to respect and value our 'liquid gold'.
People can follow Rohfritsch's journey through New Zealand