The problem of teenage bullying via Facebook is a serious one, but we don't have to look too far to see where the young people are getting it from.
They are merely taking their lead from adults, some of whom are in positions of influence and posting comments that are better left unsaid.
As an example, one doing the rounds at present: "I love everybody. Some I love to be around, some I love to avoid, and others I'd love to punch in the face."
This is mild by comparison with most others, the content of which would be deemed unsuitable for publication in this newspaper.
Lest anyone think this rubbish is posted by small-minded people without influence, it can be found on the pages of parents, business folk, people who work with youth, those in the public sector, and well-known "identities".
Any stand taken against this unbecoming behaviour has been met with ridicule by the perpetrators who defend their right to post "adult" material. There are other names for it - vulgarity, smut, and, yes, bullying.
Even if it is not directed at individuals specifically, young people who lack the maturity to see the difference happily go along with those who are their role models and see no wrong in what they do.
Young people taken to task for bullying on FB (I prefer to call it Off-Your-Facebook) hastily "unfriend" those who dare to challenge them. Why their parents are not monitoring their activity is a mystery.
As I write this, "Napier Confessions" and "Maraenui Confessions" are rampaging unchecked.
They are unimaginably ghastly. However, nothing we adults say or do will change this culture until we develop the wisdom and self-restraint to stop posting nasty stuff ourselves.

Thirty years ago the Commission for the Future, which I had the honour to direct, published an energy paper "Fast-track Self Sufficiency" showing that our lucky little country could provide all its own energy needs, including that required for our transport fleet, without needing a single barrel of oil.
So there is no national rationale for allowing overseas oil companies, which are running short of fresh fields, to come and scrape our barrel, risking our precious regional water table, polluting our countryside and walking away with the meagre profits.
I have no doubt that had we carried through a self-reliant policy, saving billions in foreign oil imports, we would now be the richest nation on earth instead of just another third world supplicant for exploitation.

This publicity greatly assists us in meeting our goal of promoting the concept that young people are capable of and really do make a positive difference in our community. We are excited that this project is able to continue into the future thanks to our dedicated photographer, Terry Winn, and financial sponsors, Pak'N Save Hastings, Hastings District Council, Bernard Chambers Trust, Lloyd Morgan Lions Club Charitable Trust and of course members of the Hastings Heretaunga Lions Club.
I was proud of all the students, who were a credit to themselves, their families, friends, schools and teachers over the years. The atmosphere created by a room full of very positive people was great. Thank you once again for your help in publicising these students, who we wish all the best for their futures as they embark on their life journey.