You vacuum it, sweep it and wipe it off your furniture. But do you know what it actually is – and how it may affect your health?
Don't feel bad if you're clueless about your dust. Scientists are not that far ahead of you in terms of understanding the sources and health risks of indoor air and particles.
That's an issue, because people spend a lot of time indoors. Indeed, the average American stays within four walls for
To better quantify environmental influences on health, researchers have begun using
Dust is a big component of the exposome. What particles are you inhaling and ingesting as you go about your day?

Instead of dumping their vacuum canister into the trash, citizen-scientists put it into a sealable bag and send it off to our lab for analysis. This project, called
About one-third of household dust is created inside your home. The components differ depending on the construction and age of your home, the climate and the cleaning and smoking habits of occupants, so there's no standard formula for dust.
First, you and your pets generate some of that detritus. Sloughed off human skin cells are part of the debris. So are
Overall, you can be sure that
So far, so gross. And there are humanmade chemicals in the mix as well. For decades, manufacturers have chemically treated clothing and furniture with flame retardants and surface protectants. In fact, for some time, the
But then researchers started identifying them in human blood and tissue, and even newborns showed
Here's one place new science and new techniques are starting to raise serious health red flags. A flurry of research is currently underway to
A pet-free and fiber-free indoor environment would be one way to reduce the amount and potential toxicity of indoor dust. But there's an additional concern that's emerged from recent research: the rise of antimicrobial resistance.
Research has linked several indoor disinfection products to antimicrobial resistance. At least one study found that elevated levels of triclosan, a common antimicrobial agent in hand soaps, were correlated with high levels of
To get a full picture of dust sources and hazards, you need to consider the other two-thirds of the indoor dust load, which
One of the most widespread health issues related to outdoor sources is lead. This potent neurotoxin has
Lead-contaminated soils, and dust generated from them, are tightly linked to
In the drive to prevent lead poisoning, scientists have focused on what they call point sources: relatively easily identifiable things like peeling paint and lead water pipes. Soil and dust exposures are less well known.
Researchers have recently found correlations between
Much as
Taking off outdoor clothing like jackets and adopting a shoeless household policy is one way to reduce indoor exposure to outdoor pollutants.
This article is republished from