We spend countless hours motivating people to look after our freshwater and coastlines.
First of all, we have to create connections to nature and establish love for it. If people lack a connection to nature, it is impossible to inspire them to look after it.
This was a key factor in our decision to coordinate a
With such big numbers of participants from multiple community sectors, it makes the events fun for those involved, which is vital, because it makes people more likely to continue positive behaviour afterwards if they have enjoyed the experience.
After connecting people to nature, we explain the human-caused problems that affect these places that are so important for our national brand, tourism market and recreation. This include littering, heavy metals coming from cars, paint and other pollutants going into stormwater drains and the pesticides, herbicides, fertiliser and effluent that come from industrial food production.
If we act with our wallet then industry will adapt.
The key conclusion to our education work is, of course, explaining what the solutions are and how people can be apart of them.
Out of all the suggestions I have made in delivering several hundred presentations over the last eight years (our small team at Sustainable Coastlines has delivered presentations to 141,604 school students, corporates and offenders), I simply cannot beat the idea of growing our own, or purchasing organic food. This involves not using chemicals to kill bugs or unsustainable fertiliser.
If you grow it yourself or bring your own packaging, you will also reduce impact of litter and plastic consumption. Gardening also provides much-needed exercise for people and happiness that is proven to combat depression.
The problem is, of course, the cost.
This is a difficult problem, but you would have thought that the well documented benefits of a healthy diet and associated savings in treating obesity and diabetes might be a worthy case for some assistance for growers that provide this vital service to our population.
At the very least, healthy vegetables should be served in public institutions such as hospitals. Complaints about this have been rife, particularly in Otago, where Meals on Wheels' nutritional value has been disputed and
Along this thread, I fully support
I would have thought that the public sector - particular in health - should set the example of a healthy diet for people.
Happily, the
Should we require publicly funded institutions to shift to healthy, if not organic produce and zero waste packaging?