During the election campaign, Conservation Minister Nick Smith promised a re-elected National Government would ban commercial fishing from a new recreational fishing park in the inner Hauraki Gulf.
Admitting that not much commercial fishing occurred in the area anyway, Dr Smith said his new Marine Protected Areas Act, of which this would be part, was part "of our ambition for New Zealand to be a world leader in the responsible use, management and conservation of our ocean environment".
The latest
Since 2005, the forum has been issuing three-yearly state of the environment reports on the parlous state of the gulf. In reply, the rest of us have muttered 'how dreadful', then gone on over-fishing, pouring our stormwater run-off and sewage overflows into the sparkling Waitemata and turning a blind eye to developments further south where the water body we share had become a giant lavatory for the dairy herds of the Hauraki Plains.
The 2008 report worried about the unknown levels of pollution pouring into the poorly flushing harbours from Auckland City, and the "vast amount of nitrogen" flowing into the Firth of Thames thanks to the 410,000 cows. It bemoaned the lack of basic knowledge available, and the lack of funds available to do the research needed before any plan of action could be drawn up.
Three years on, and nothing has changed. On the eve of issuing the 2014 Domesday Book on the gulf, Forum chairman John Tregidga warned that the decline was continuing, and demanded action "to stop the degradation".
Auckland Council's two forum representatives joined in, Christine Fletcher calling it "a damning account of our collective failure to take action". Her colleague, Mike Lee, homed in on the abysmal lack of knowledge of the state of the fisheries.
He echoes the report which notes that "fishing occurs in most parts of the gulf and has one of the greatest influences on its marine ecosystem ... [but] ... the status of most of the top 15 finfish stocks relative to fisheries targets remains unknown".
It gets worse. The impact of trawling and scallop dredging on seabed communities "have not been addressed". Levels of copper, lead, mercury and zinc exceed guideline levels in various sediments around Auckland. Nitrogen levels flowing down the Waihou River into the gulf are increasing, but the Waikato Regional Council does not monitor coastal nutrients.
But a long-term investigation by Niwa "suggests that nutrient inputs to the Firth of Thames are leading to sagging oxygen levels and coastal acidification".
About the only bright spot is that "significant gains are being made in island restoration".
With no leadership from either central or local government, Maori activists have stolen a march by launching a Hauraki Gulf Marine Spatial Plan project. Their aim is to produce a final plan by next September. The document will have no statutory basis, but proponents, headed by Paul Majurey, are hoping councils and government agencies will somehow be persuaded to put the plan into practice. It's a big hope given the make-up of the key project steering committee. Half the 16 members represent local iwi, while Auckland Council and Waikato Regional Council have just two each. The Department of Conservation has one, as has the Ministry of Primary Industries. With some difficulty, one suspects, the primary industries representative will have to represent both the threatened fish, and the polluting cows.
Another committee, the Stakeholder Working Group, which has the "primary responsibility" for drafting the plan, also seems an odd mix, including, as it does, a long-line fisherman, an oyster farmer, who for 20 years was a high-profile face of New Zealand's oyster industry, a dairy farmer, and the head of communications for Ports of Auckland.
The scientific evidence needed to draw up a true picture of the gulf's health and plan its recovery is just not available. To sell a recovery plan to reluctant politicians, what is vital is basic facts providing, for example, an accurate picture of the nitrogen levels flowing in from the Hauraki Plains. It also needs more than weekend fishermen's anecdotes about fish numbers.