Ireland and other countries are moving fast to claim the clean green mantle that has long been associated with New Zealand. We have become complacent, and our most valuable national asset is at risk.
Ireland has a national project to drive towards sustainability of their farming system and to market it aggressively. By the end of this year, virtually all their beef and dairy farms will be audited to meet the agreed standards.
•
As Kiwis, we still recognise this story about our country - clean flowing rivers, pristine beaches, fresh air and a fair go for all. But we are polluting our environment and widening inequities in our society. We are also failing to tell our story through our exports. We don't talk about our grass-fed dairy, our hormone-free beef and our GM-free crops.
The market for products with credible sustainability credentials is large and growing. Research into a group of consumers dubbed LOHAS - Lifestyles of Health and Sustainability - shows this segment comprises around 20 per cent in OECD countries and a rapidly growing segment in emerging Asian economies.
The growth of socially and environmentally conscious consumers is fueled by a generational change. Within a decade, millennials will amount to 75 per cent of the global workforce, and they will work for, buy from and invest in enterprises they love.
There is a new generation of business leaders, aware that their role is to contribute to society, not just to maximize profits. Mounting research shows that doing good is also good business.
Commitments to climate action by large businesses in the run up to the Paris Agreement sent an important signal to governments that they needed to step up and provide a predictable policy framework.
Companies such as Z Energy and Vector are positioning themselves for the future in a time of technology and market disruption. The wine sector as a whole is collaborating to drive towards sustainability.
Major international retailers like Walmart, Tescos and Carrefour now require their suppliers to meet social and environmental standards, with independent verification.
It is not too late for New Zealand to once again take the mantle of leadership on sustainability. But it needs commitment and collaboration across society - business, academics, civil society, consumers and government.
• Captain David Morgan, from Air New Zealand.