Some travellers go to extraordinary lengths to take a bath.
Me, for instance.
Mention a trip to Japan and soaking in a tub is up near the top of my to-do list.
I don't regard it as a time-waster. In fact, it's one of the most memorable experiences of a visit to this hi-tech Asian nation.
Even though the country is arguably more technologically advanced than anywhere else on earth, this ancient ritual survives - and thrives.
I'm not talking about any old bath. No, what attracts me is the onsen (traditional Japanese bathhouse).
Like almost everything else in Japan, bathhouse use is governed by strict rules. Well, they're not really rules - more custom and etiquette. But thinking of them as rules reduces the likelihood of being remembered as an ignorant foreigner.
Bathhouses are part of the landscape all over Japan - in big cities and small rural towns, in business-oriented destinations as much as in holiday haunts.
Some are large and lavish establishments in major hotels. Others are tiny family-run businesses. Most obtain mineral-rich water from natural springs, which are numerous on these volcanic islands.
A few, in remote country areas, don't segregate the sexes. If you find yourself in such a place you just have to deal with it - and accept that you're totally naked among a bunch of strangers, some of whom will inevitably be of the opposite gender.
However, they couldn't care less that you're not wearing clothes. Japanese don't regard bathhouse nudity as an issue - and consider it puzzling, even amusing, that some foreigners make a fuss about it.
These days, it's usual to segregate the sexes - though not to do away with nudity. In cities as well as in country areas commonly frequented by tourists, the onsen you visit will almost certainly have separate facilities for men and women.
For example, on my most recent bathhouse visit - to an onsen at the
On each side of the wall is a series of outdoor pools (an onsen can be inside or out) with water ranging from so-hot-it's-almost-scalding to tooth-chatteringly cold. You pick one you like - or move between them.
Sound advice at an onsen is to do what the Japanese do.
So, I strut confidently between pools - completely naked except for a small hand towel atop my head.
I return the next day, reminding myself to remember onsen etiquette and not make gaffes which would make a fool of me and horrify fellow-bathers.
Abide by these onsen customs to help you blend into the scene:







Adhering to etiquette will make onsen visits enjoyable. But flouting custom attracts disapproving stares.