The
To support this extreme Muslim "freedom fighter" on behalf of many local people who Hone Harawira represents could be a potential danger to us here.
Beware of his support, I do suggest.
I hope that you, as I do, actually enjoy the job you do and the achievements one can make, however small, will, eventually be recognised and rewarded. I know I live forever in hope, but, if you do not believe that the reward fits the job and believe more salary makes you give better decisions for the city, or you do believe that you are destined for higher gain elsewhere, then, please, go for it.
Re Life-changing moments (Bay of Plenty Times Weekend, April 30).
What would it take for there to be a more informed choice around the screening test?
What does it take for the money to show up to get this printed and out to NZ parents ASAP? Thank you so much for sharing your story.
The late Cardinal Mindszenty said that the most important person on earth is a mother. She cannot claim the honour of having built Notre Dame Cathedral. She need not. She has built something more magnificent than any cathedral, a dwelling for an immortal soul, the tiny perfection of her baby's body ... The angels have not been blessed with such a grace. They cannot share in God's creative miracle to bring new saints to Heaven. Only a mother can.
Re Elderly man struck on crossing (News, May 4). This incident highlights the dangers faced when trying to cross the main road in Bethlehem. Sadly it was only a matter of time before someone was hit on one of the crossings.
My son and I were almost hit in February when tying to cross at the crossing a little further down the road from the crossing where the gentleman was hit.
Had it not been for my quick reactions, we both might have been hit. I know of several other people who have nearly been hit on this crossing.
When the road was being upgraded years ago, I suggested they put in an underpass for pedestrians, but was told the budget wouldn't stretch to it. I have to ask, what is the price of a human being?
The story of the loss of the Norfolk pine in Gate Pa is disturbing (News, April 4). Tauranga is long regarded as having few natural attractions (compared to the beaches of the Mount) other than its beautiful trees.
How is this in keeping with the stated intent to preserve the landscape of our communities; trees, whether they are individual or groups of trees are part of the heritage in our city, and effort should be made to protect these for all including future generations, to enjoy.
Not a bell-bird belling or a tui tootling, but the sound of a mangrove muncher munching. Boy, this puppy cut not only a dash but also a swathe through the harbour's green but not so "green" pollutant.
My advice to the Regional Council is listen to, and act on the wishes, of the vast majority of the people of Tauranga who want this gorse of the sea gone, and ignore the few ill-informed moaners who hold their AGM in a telephone box.
Re Pitbull's fate up to court after attacks (Bay of Plenty Times Weekend, April 30).
Ridiculous that the owner has to agree the dog is "dangerous" before anything can lawfully be done, ridiculous.