United States: A driverless shuttle bus has crashed less than two hours after it was launched in Las Vegas. Police say no injuries were reported in the crash between the self-operating vehicle and a semi-truck. It's not yet clear what caused the accident. Officials had hosted an unveiling ceremony to promote what they described as America's first self-driving shuttle pilot project geared toward the public. The oval-shaped shuttle that can transport up to 12 passengers has an attendant and computer monitor, but no steering wheel and no brake pedals. It uses GPS, electronic curb sensors and other technology to make its way. Before it crashed, dozens of people had lined up in downtown Las Vegas to get a free ride.

Australia: A 4-year-old girl's stolen puppy has been dumped in her backyard, days after going missing during a burglary in Melbourne. The labrador puppy, Sasha, was found in the family's Croydon Hills yard, three days after she was stolen alongside a laptop, iPad and jewellery, police say. The little girl's father, Ryan, told the Nine Network both his daughter and the dog were "ecstatic" and "both frantic, running around".

Romania: Romania's royal house said it has filed a complaint with Swiss police alleging that the estranged grandson of the ailing ex-King Michael I tried to force his way into his grandfather's home. The royal house said that Nicholas Medforth-Mills attempted "to violate the home of His Majesty" in Switzerland. It alleged in a statement that Medforth-Mills "physically and verbally aggressed" three staff members. Medforth-Mills, 32, accused his relatives of doing their "utmost to stop me seeing my grandfather and discredit my name". The former monarch is suffering from leukemia and a form of skin cancer. The 96-year-old Michael was Romania's last king and is one of the few leaders from the years of World War II still living. He stripped Medforth-Mills of his royal title in 2015. Stunned Romanians speculated a jealous relative wanted to edge the grandson out of the prestigious family. The popular Medforth-Mills was third in the line of succession. In real terms, the title means little, as Romania became a republic when Michael abdicated.

Yemen: Hundreds of cars lined the main roads of Yemen's capital after the rebels who control the city ordered fuel stations to close, accusing merchants of taking advantage of a Saudi blockade to hike prices. A Saudi-led military coalition tightened its blockade in Yemen this week after a ballistic missile fired by Houthi rebels was intercepted near the Saudi capital. Aid groups say the measures will exacerbate an already severe humanitarian crisis in the impoverished, war-torn country. Fuel prices have spiked by 50 per cent since Tuesday. Hassan al-Zaydi, a spokesman for the Houthi-run Oil Ministry, said merchants had refused orders to keep prices fixed, prompting authorities to shut the fuel stations down.

Syria: Syria's army and its allies, including Lebanon's Hizbollah, have captured the last major Isis-held town in Syria, a commander in the military alliance supporting Syrian President Bashar al-Assad says. "The last stronghold of Daesh (Islamic State), Albu Kamal, is free of the Daesh organisation," the commander said. The commander added that Iraqi Popular Mobilisation Forces also took part in the capture of Albu Kamal, located in Syria near the Iraqi border on the Euphrates River.

- agencies