Your article (
This week, the Treasury select committee asked me, ShareAction and the UK Sustainable Investment and Finance Association what investors can do about the oil and gas industry. My answer was that we need to use more than just persuasion. Our money can shape the strategies of these companies directly. Savvy investors should back those that respond to change, not the ones who deny the urgency.
At this week’s Extinction Rebellion protests I spoke at the event called 
 It is right that the world’s oil firms have been called out (
And let us not forget that each one of us must take responsibility for our use of fossil fuels; put flying at the back of the queue as the transport of last resort. Train travel within Europe is fast and comfortable. People will soon adjust. We just have to.
 George Monbiot places primary responsibility for global warming with petrochem firms, and classes the middle classes of the west as gullible victims of the machinations of the oil producers (
Walmart could be held responsible for more CO
In the nasty cocaine trade, who is really at fault? The Colombian farmer who produces it (“petrochem”), the cartel which manages the whole chain (“Walmart”), or the westerner who snorts it (“gullible victim”)?
To me, listing the top petrochem firms as the primary drivers of global warming looks like listing the 20 biggest farmers in the foothills as the primary drivers of the drug trade.
Of course the parallel is not perfect, but the logic holds. If every middle-class westerner with a weekend habit makes do with a cup of tea instead, the cocaine trade stops. So, ditch your car; scrap your boiler; cut off the power. Yeah, right. 
 Your articles covering the top 20 global polluters were excellent. As well as exposing the massive contribution the 20 make to the destruction of our planet, they also highlight the absurd levels of income of their CEOs. The income of half of them is undisclosed, but the other half are paid a total about $130m a year. So let’s be clear: these companies are not just helping bring about extinction, they’re also fuelling gross inequality. The rebellion against them must be on both fronts.