London mayor 
In a new report published on Tuesday, the group, including the chair of the NHS Sir Malcolm Grant, said the mayor must go further to reduce car use across the capital and harness new technology to create a system based around “public transport, walking and cycling”.
The findings come amid mounting evidence of the health threat posed by the UK’s air pollution crisis. Last week it emerged that as well as illegal levels of NO2 pollution, 
The scale of the situation was highlighted this week when MPs from four Commons committees decided to 
Launching the inquiry, Lilian Greenwood MP, chair of the transport select committee, said: “Real change is possible if government leads from the front to coordinate an effective response to one of the biggest issues of our time.”
Khan has set out a range of plans to tackle pollution from diesel cars in the capital. The first stage, the 
Next year, the roll-out of the Ultra Low Emission Zone (ULEZ) begins, which will impose an additional charge on the most polluting vehicles. 
But the report, titled the Commission on the Future of London’s Roads and Streets, commissioned by the Centre for 
It suggests the low emissions zone should be used to identify the dirtiest vehicles and offer them “mobility tokens” to spend on public transport or other green alternatives in exchange for taking their vehicles off the road.
It also suggests:
Green groups and clean air campaigners have welcomed the mayor’s plans on air pollution but agree he must go further. 
Rosie Rogers, Greenpeace UK’s senior clean air campaigner, said the report was “absolutely right to call on the London mayor to be bold in reshaping the capital’s transport system”.
“Tackling the air pollution crisis that’s threatening the health of so many Londoners, especially children, will require a far-reaching and ambitious strategy,” she said, adding that the mayor had “already taken some welcome steps … but much more needs to be done”.
“With diesel being a major contributor to illegal air pollution, Sadiq Khan’s plan will need to include tough action on all diesel cars, old and new, if it is to succeed.”
ClientEarth spokesperson Simon Alcock said: “The mayor has shown leadership on air quality since he came to office, with the proposed extension of the ULEZ, for example, but he can and should go much further. 
“There is a whole range of technologies that can be used to help people move to cleaner transport and reduce the number of vehicles on London’s streets. The UK government, which has failed to tackle illegal pollution levels all over the UK, should be working with the mayor to speed up these policies – not holding him back.” 
The Green party has accused Khan of compromising his air quality plans by 
Caroline Russell, Green party member of the London Assembly, said that while Khan’s “vision for healthy streets” was “really encouraging” it was undermined by proposals for the new road tunnel. 
“By inexplicably pushing for a giant road tunnel that would swamp what is already one of the most polluted parts of the capital with even more cars, he threatens to undermine his promising vision for more walking and cycling.”