The documentary 
The film tells the story of Crossett, Arkansas, a small town dominated by a huge 
 “This is a story that never gets told,” Schneiderman said, “and it takes tremendous commitment to get to the quiet tragedies that are taking place all across America all the time. 
“The environmental movement really has not done as good a job perhaps as we should have done carrying the essential message that people who are poor and without power are always on the front lines of pollution and environmental justice.”
The Kochs are billionaire US brothers noted for their control of oil-and-gas giant Koch Industries, the second-largest privately owned US company – and for their anti-regulatory politics. Charles and David Koch (pronounced "coke") head up the $115bn company, and are well known for their quiet financial support of conservative causes, through such groups as Americans for Prosperity, a key player in the Tea Party movement. They share the No 8 spot in Forbes' list of the world's richest people.
The brothers inherited the company from their father, Fred Koch – who made his fortune in the 1930s building oil refineries for the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin – and grew it into a multinational giant that now includes a broad array of consumer products, such as paper towels.
David Koch, New York City's richest resident (ahead of Rupert Murdoch and former mayor Michael Bloomberg), was the libertarian vice-presidential nominee in 1980. He has also been a major donor to the arts, giving $100m to a prominent 
The billionaire brothers have long sought to influence public opinion on energy and climate change, pouring hundreds of millionsinto universities, non-profits, thinktanks and political campaigns. But this week marked their first foray into publishing when, through their private equity arm, Koch Equity Development, they provided Meredith Corp with a $650m cash boost in its purchase of Time Inc.
Kottke-Masocco, who describes herself as “a documentary film-maker and an activist”, went to Crossett in 2011 to work on a section of 
In some of the film’s most striking passages, Kottke-Masocco and Sardarian show officials from the 
Company Town was alarming enough when it premiered at the LA film festival in June 2016. In November, Donald Trump was elected president. In office, he appointed former Oklahoma attorney general Scott Pruitt 
“It’s made the film more urgent,” Kottke-Masocco told the Guardian. “It’s made the story more urgent, it’s made Crossett’s issue more important and urgent. We actually scrambled the last two months and updated the title cards in the film to make them more significant.
“We want people to understand the gravity of Trump taking office because the EPA is threatened more than ever under Scott Pruitt, a man who as Oklahoma attorney general 
Schneiderman has pursued the president on fronts including the Trump University fraud case, which was settled for 
The story of Crossett has been reported in depth by 
Schneiderman said the film showed what can happen when people with “no power, no money”, like Bouie, Slavant and the whistleblower Dickie Guice, a former Georgia-Pacific safety co-ordinator, range themselves “against the most malevolent, powerful forces in our country … with the courage to stand up and step up”.
“To those who say, ‘Oh my goodness, things are so difficult right now,’” he said, “I’ll say that when you see these people, we can all keep going.
“The filmmakers have, and I say this as a state law enforcement official, captured the way the rich and powerful bend government to their will. And the film sends a powerful message, that we need our state actors to stand up, particularly these days if the federal government is not going to do its job. The state actors are critical. 
“The federal government depends on the states, you see in the movie the EPA is very dependent on states to enforce the law. The [federal government] can’t enforce their laws, we see this in 
“So this is an incredible story of courage and of wrongdoing but also a story about how we need to take our government back and our country back.”