The government’s 
The question is whether turning the plan into reality will become a political nightmare when confronted with vested interests or lack of Treasury funds. Such ghouls have shattered far less ambitious goals in the past.
The vision itself is an important moment, categorically stating that a healthy environment is essential to both our happiness and wellbeing as well as to a thriving economy. 
Countryside, conservation and business groups all welcomed the plan – a potential “game-changer” according to WWF’s Tanya Steele. But all had the same concern as Steele: “These commitments will only become a reality if they are backed by the force of law, money and a new environmental watchdog.”
A strong watchdog will be vital after Brexit, as the EU currently regulates most green issues. The pledge on this was one of the firmer commitments in the plan – the problem is that is not saying very much. Environment secretary Michael Gove promised to “consult on plans to set up an independent, statutory body”.
There are other big, important ideas in the plan, such as “developing” 500,000 hectares of new wildlife-rich habitat on top of existing nature reserves and, crucially, aiming to 
Another is “seeking to embed” a new planning principle of “net environmental gain” so that the building of new houses results in an overall benefit by restoring other neglected or degraded land. That appears to be a radical departure from the slash-and-burn approach to planning regulations under David Cameron’s government, but the plan gives no clue as to how it will win over powerful and cost-averse developers.
There are also plenty of eye-catching suggestions, such as delivering environmental therapies through mental health services, a 
The plan recognises the national soil crisis – 84% of the fertile topsoil in East Anglia has been lost in the last 200 years – and aims to have all of England’s soils managed sustainably by 2030. Tackling the pollution that pours off many farms into rivers is also taken seriously, as is reform of older water licences that allow the holders to drain as much as they like, whatever the environmental cost.
These and many other proposals make the 25-year plan a good one, but what happens when the hard choices arrive? An examination of the Conservative track record since 2010 is not encouraging. 
Cameron showed far more green zeal than May ever has, even if a key goal of both was attracting younger voters. But when gas prices pushed up energy bills, Cameron 
May promised cleaner air on Thursday. But last year, when confronted with the illegal levels of air pollution killing 40,000 people a year, she 
Past double-dealing also damages confidence in many of the new plan’s proposals. The pledge to end the plastic pollution that plagues the oceans comes as recycling rates have stalled in England, with more than ever now burned instead. Confidence in 
There are also a few areas where even the vision of the new plan falls short, most worryingly on adapting the UK to the impacts of climate change. In 2016, the government’s official advisors warned that the 
Floods are the biggest risk and the new plan wisely recommends “putting in place more sustainable drainage systems”, but omits the fact that Tory ministers have imposed a 
One bright spot, however, is tackling the rising risk of drought. The plan says water companies will be expected “to reduce leakage by at least an average of 15% by 2025”. Today, many companies in the south and east of England have reduction targets for 2020 of zero, despite 20% of all water leaking away.
The plan acknowledges that “long-term action requires us to take difficult choices, some with considerable economic consequences, about conservation”. So far, May and Gove have taken the easy choices, from 
But perhaps there is one omen that implies the lofty vision of the plan may survive a collision with the reality of big vested interests. Gove has insisted he will dismantle the £3bn-a-year farm subsidy scheme, replacing rewards for simply owning land with 
The new laws, regulations and Treasury funds needed to make the government’s 25-year plan a reality also remain to be delivered. As Gove himself remarked: “There is much more still to do.”