Maria das Gracas started collecting her plastic bottles after she saw the body of her neighbour floating past her house, carried along with the pollution that helped cause the deadly floods.
She stores them by the front door of her one-story home, which sits on the litter-strewn banks of the Tejipió river in north-east 
When she has enough she will take them to the local storage skip, where a litter collector will pay her two reals for 50 plastic bottles – about 40 pence. She’s not just doing it for the money. She’s doing it to stop the tide of plastic drowning this community.
Every day Maria and other residents of Coqueiral, a poor neighbourhood in the city of Recife, feel the impact of the world’s plastic binge. It is visible in the waters of the river that once flowed freely through the area. 
Fifty years ago when Rildo Wandray was a boy, he would jump into the Tejipió and swim, while his friends fished beside him. 
Today the river is stagnant, obstructed at every tributary by a tide of plastic waste; Coca-Cola and Fanta bottles, water containers, crisp packets and wrappers.
Globally, some 2 billion people live in communities with no rubbish collections. While international attention has focused recently on the marine plastic litter crisis, the devastating impact of plastic waste on the world’s poorest is no less destructive, causing flooding, disease, and hundreds of thousands of premature deaths from toxic fumes caused by the burning of waste.
In Recife the plastic waste is exacerbating already devastating flooding from 
For das Gracas, the tipping point came when flooding took the life of one of her neighbours. “I was trapped inside my home with my son,” she said.
“There was nothing we could do, the water came up and we could not get out. I looked out and saw a body float past. She was face down, I could see the hair. That night the flood nearly took me too. Ever since then I have collected my bottles, I wanted to try and do something to reduce the waste going into the river.”
 Organised and supported by the local baptist church through its project