Joyce Quin is right to draw attention to the links between trade agreements and responding to the climate crisis (
As the climate emergency grows more serious, the world’s nations will at last start having to make real choices about whether to respond seriously to the challenge. Those that do will be faced with the urgent dilemma of how to deal with those that don’t.
Lord Stern’s hope that all states would be amenable to rational analysis and persuasion seems to have proved overoptimistic. Thus the only real option (excluding military action for obvious reasons) will be to refuse to trade with those states that are unwilling to face their responsibilities, except in those sectors that are not damaging to the climate.
There is some logic to this in that the economic policies and models of the states that are most hostile to effective emergency measures are also to a large extent those contributing most to climate change. Seriously damaging these economies would be brutal – but the alternative is even worse. The issue for the UK is where are we going to be when this choice has to be made. 
 Adults need to stop telling Greta Thunberg how inspirational they find her and how wonderful she is (
 The teachers who have left the classroom for Extinction Rebellion (
However, they should be heartened to know that geography – the GCSE subject that teaches about climate change, ecosystems, biodiversity and resource management – is gaining more and more traction with young people from all backgrounds. Since 2010 this subject has experienced year-on-year growth, which has come disproportionately from disadvantaged pupils, black, Asian and minority ethnic pupils and those studying in comprehensive schools.
Studying geography helps young people better understand the interdependencies between people, the environment and places – be they at the local or global scale. In this way, it is a subject that helps young people, regardless of background, discover the truth about our world and the environmental challenges we face.
 Re your article (
I presume a sizable portion of pollution affecting Shotley is produced while ships run their oil-burning generators continuously while berthed. Would one way of reducing pollution be to provide quayside stations to which each ship has to connect a cable to draw mains electricity?
The North Sea off the Suffolk and Essex coast is home to wind generation, with more to come. The more environmentally aware and cost-conscious shipping operators are using liquefied natural gas instead of oil for propulsion. A small number are trialling wind turbines mounted on deck for secondary propulsion. Why not stop using oil-generated power while berthed?