A former Tory cabinet minister is backing efforts to force through tough green laws after Brexit, amid anger over plans that would 
Four former environment and climate change secretaries from three parties told the 
Senior Tory MPs are also said to have concerns about the move. It comes after a row over post-Brexit green laws between 
Gove, a leading Brexiter, has been keen for the new watchdog to have identical powers to those currently enjoyed by the European commission, which can fine governments that fail to meet their green obligations. However, the Treasury is said to have concerns about the impact on post-Brexit growth and construction.
A cross-party group of peers is planning a rebellion this week that would keep all the green protections currently in place, including the power to take legal action against the government.
Among those backing the rebellion is John Gummer, now 
“We wouldn’t have had any of the action that we’ve had up until now unless the EU structures had the power to hold the government to account. The government committed itself to putting into British law all the protections and commitments that we have in the EU. Unless we make these changes, you don’t do that.”
Green groups immediately spoke out after Gove’s 
Former climate change secretaries called for an urgent rethink. Labour’s 
Gove’s watchdog is a toothless mutt
“Michael Gove claimed to have been deeply moved by David Attenborough’s 
The Lib Dem MP 
Chris Huhne, who also held the role under the coalition, said: “Gove’s watchdog is a toothless mutt. Basic legal principles in EU law like polluter pays and the precautionary principle have been ditched to allow a sludge brown not green 
Amy Mount, of the Greener UK coalition, said: “The government’s plans for this toothless watchdog would leave us with weaker protections after Brexit. The power to take the government to court is a strong deterrent and then a vital last resort when the law is not being followed. This means we need more than advisory notices if our air is dangerously polluted, or wildlife under serious threat.
“It is also very troubling that the watchdog will not enforce law relating to climate change, despite ministers’ claims of global leadership on this urgent challenge. Bizarrely, this would mean that after Brexit the climate will be less protected than every other aspect of our environment.
“There is still time for the government to live up to its stated ‘world leading’ ambitions, but time is fast running out.”