Cyclists are the least exposed to air pollution on daily commutes into a congested city centre, research has shown. People in cars and buses spent longer in toxic air, as did walkers unless they made detours to avoid main roads.
The 
Other recent research has led experts to advise parents to use covers on their buggies during the school run to protect their infants. 
Most urban areas in the UK have illegal levels of air pollution, and ministers have lost three times in the high court over the inadequacy of their action. The 
The new research used high-quality portable pollution-measuring equipment to track rush-hour commutes of 4km (2.5 miles) into and out of Leeds city centre in June. All the commuters set off at the same time, and the cyclists were by far the fastest, arriving in 11 minutes, half the time of bus and car travellers.
The cyclists were exposed to a total of 12m pollution particles during their journey, almost half the number encountered by those in buses and cars. Cyclists may breathe more rapidly as they exercise, which would bring the particles they inhale up to close to that of motorised transport users. But on routes with slow traffic, where car and bus commuters are forced to sit in clouds of pollution, cyclists fare best.
“On more congested routes, the cyclist would come out with the lowest inhaled dose,” said James Tate, at the University of Leeds, who led the work. Segregated cycle lanes would reduce cyclists’ exposure even more, he said, with a distance of even a metre or two from traffic cutting particles by about a quarter. “Cycle lanes mean you can skip past traffic,” he said. Other research shows the exercise benefits of cycling 
The commuting route was quite long for walkers, and their 35-minute journey time meant they experienced the highest air pollution. The researchers also tested a green walking route that was 20% longer but avoided busy streets. They found particle exposure fell by 75% on the green route. In London, another study found green routes 
“Walkers have a decision to make, particularly on polluted days,” said Tate. “It may take a little longer but, if you have time, you can really cut down on your exposure by walking on a green route.”
The team analysed each stage of the commutes and found the most polluted times for walkers were when they waited at junctions controlled by traffic lights. For cyclists, the peak pollution was when high buildings formed a canyon that trapped toxic air.
Nitrogen dioxide, a pollutant largely emitted by diesel vehicles, was only measured in the vehicles, owing to the cumbersome size of the equipment needed. Inside the cabin of a small electric Nissan van, the driver was exposed to levels above the annual legal limit of 40 micrograms per cubic metre for much of the journey, with peaks of over 100 micrograms per cubic metre.
“Once you have drawn it in, it takes quite a while for the cabin to ventilate,” said Tate, who presented the work at a 
Gary Fuller, of King’s College London, the author of