he wrecking ball has always been the great symbol of urban progress, going hand in hand with dynamite and dust clouds as the politicians’ favourite way of showing they are 
We might have no choice, given the way our voracious urban consumption habits are going. In the UK, the construction industry accounts for 60% of all materials used, while creating a third of all waste and generating 45% of all CO2 emissions in the process. It is a greedy, profligate and polluting monster, gobbling up resources and spitting out the remains in intractable lumps. On our current course, we are set to triple material extraction in 30 years, and 
This is not just about adding more solar panels, biomass boilers, and all the other bolt-on gadgets to tick the green assessment boxes. It requires a fundamental shift in our attitude to materials.
“We have to think of buildings as material depots,” says 
He has developed the concept of 
Rau’s arguments have gained traction. The Dutch government has now 
Taking reuse to its logical conclusion, Rau sees a future where every part of a building would be treated as a temporary service, rather than owned. From the facade to the lightbulbs, each element would be rented from the manufacturer, who would be responsible for providing the best possible performance and continual upkeep, as well as dealing with the material at the end of its life. “Ownership blocks innovation,” he says. “Treating building elements as a service would remove planned obsolescence and increase transparency and responsibility.” He has already convinced the company Philips to offer lighting as a service (
The Netherlands is not alone in its circular ambitions. In the race to become the greenest city on the planet, the Danish capital of 
They saw an opportunity in the demolition of Copenhagen’s vast Carlsberg brewery, whose bricks wouldn’t usually have been reused because modern cement mortar makes it very difficult to separate them. Instead, they took an angle grinder to the walls and sliced them up in one metre square chunks, stacking the panels to form a striking patchwork facade for the new apartment block. Windows, meanwhile, have been reused to make greenhouse roofs for shared allotments. The green credentials have proved popular: the homes were rented out more quickly than any other housing scheme in the city.
Another of Lendager’s projects reaches closer to 70% CO2 reduction. 
Like Rau, the Lendager Group has been campaigning for the construction industry to move towards a more circular model, but finding few receptive contractors, they decided to get on with it themselves. Discovering that few companies were willing to either dismantle buildings carefully enough for materials to be reused, or reuse second hand materials without warranties, they set up their own in-house demolition and construction arm, carrying out performance tests on reclaimed building components and taking on the liability.
“The moral argument simply doesn’t work,” says Rau. “We have to organise our thinking along the financial axis.” He calculates that, on average, the residual value of a building’s materials equates to around 18% of the original construction cost – a huge bonus to the bottom line, considering clients are usually saddled with the cost of disposing of demolition waste, rather than reaping any reward from it. “We have to show that materials are a valuable asset, rather than an expense to be lumbered with.”
One recent study found that the 2.6m tonnes of building material “released” each year through renovation and demolition in Amsterdam alone 
While much of mainland Europe is well on the way to reimagining buildings as “urban mines” of potential, the UK is slowly beginning to catch up. Architect 
“Since Greta Thunberg and Extinction Rebellion, the industry is starting to wake up,” he says. “National legislation is still way behind, but a lot of local authorities are getting on with it anyway.” He has been working with Brighton and Hove council to instil circular principles into the way local procurement works, and will be running an architectural summer school looking at how waste streams can be harvested from one of the council’s demolition sites and reused. In a welcome sign of progress, 
Signalling a wider shift in the profession, the Architect’s Journal has joined the movement and 
Architecture prizes are also indicating the change in mindset, in a welcome shift away from celebrating the signature baubles of the past. The World Building of the Year award was recently given to a retrofit project, which saw a former train shed in the Dutch city of Tilburg