moke from this season’s bushfires has turned the sun red, the moon orange and the sky an insipid grey. It has obscured iconic views tourists flock to see. Far more than an aesthetic problem, it has forced business shutdowns, triggered health problems and kept children indoors for weeks.
City dwellers in south-east Australia have been forced to take a crash course in the finer points of air pollution. We’ve learned about the dangers of inhaling tiny PM2.5 particles (those 2.5 microns or fewer in diameter). We’ve learned that only a 
Still, we wear disposable paper masks and hold handkerchiefs to our faces, hoping any amount of filtering is helpful.
Even for an historian of air pollution like me, this situation is a shock. It is not the first time Australia’s major cities have been shrouded in bushfire smoke. But the terrible air quality is unmatched in terms of severity, duration and extent.
Historically, air pollution from smoke was considered outside human control and not subject to regulation. But these bushfires are 
In recent weeks, apps such as 
The NSW government’s 
Index readings above 2,550 have been recorded in Sydney, while the 
Bushfire smoke has affected the cities of NSW and the Australian Capital Territory in the past. 
In several years in the mid-1930s, bushfires burning to the north of Sydney left the city air thick with smoke. 
A New Zealand pilot, flying into Sydney from Longreach the following month, had to 
In the summer of 1944, Sydney was again enveloped in a smoke haze, this time from fires in the Blue Mountains and (later Royal) national park in November. Photographs published at the time show the 
In November 1951, all of NSW was said to be blacked out by bushfire smoke. In Sydney on the worst days, records show 
In each of these episodes, bushfire smoke disrupted transport, commerce, health and the enjoyment of the urban environment. But even as other forms of air pollution began to be regulated, smoke from bushfires escaped legislative attention.
What was understood as air pollution were the unwanted byproducts of industrial processes, whereas bushfire smoke was viewed as natural.
, an act based on British legislation restricted smoke from mills, distilleries and gas works. Further limitations on smoke production in built-up areas were included in later acts governing public health (1902), motor traffic (1909) and local government (1919).
After the second world war 
In 1958, a NSW parliamentary committee delivered a 
Air pollution legislation continued to 
These measures have been successful. A 
Today, bushfire smoke is excluded from air quality regulations, despite its obvious role in pollution. It is still considered natural and beyond human control.
However, the 
As the Australian National University’s 
When Australia begins the recovery from these fires, our business-as-usual approach requires a rethink. Measures to protect air quality should be a major part of this.
It is time that corporations, governments and societies which contribute to global heating be held to account for more frequent, intense and widespread bushfires, and the smoke which billows from them.
Nancy Cushing is an associate professor at the University of Newcastle
This piece was originally published