he persistent haze over many of our cities is a reminder of the polluted air that we breathe. 
Globally, urban populations are 
Over 80% of city dwellers around the world are breathing air that fails to meet WHO guidelines.
An estimated 4.5 million people died prematurely from outdoor air pollution in 2015
 that loom over cities, buses that 
As the cities of the future are built in and around those that exist today, demolition and construction will inevitably create air pollution – but small changes in age-old methods can make a huge difference. Explosives and wrecking balls can be replaced by machines that slowly nibble away at the concrete and mist canyons that suppress dust at source. In a world first, in 2015 London created 
Traffic has become synonymous with air pollution, and many countries intend to ban the sale of new petrol and diesel cars in the next two decades. But simply switching to electric cars will not mean pollution-free cities. The level of emissions they cause will depend on how the electricity 
We can do better than simply switching fossil fuel-powered cars for battery, electric or hydrogen vehicles by prioritising more active forms of transport – a change that is already under way.
Across the developed world, car use is in decline as more people move to city centres, while young people especially are opting for other means of travel. 
But as users of London’s orbital M25 motorway will know, new roads rapidly fill with more traffic. In the US, 
Fortunately the opposite happens too: motorists adapt when roads are taken away. Between 1973 and 2003, a 6km, four-lane elevated expressway took 170,000 vehicles per day into the heart of Seoul in South Korea. It was frequently congested. Instead of building more lanes, city authorities demolished the whole thing. Sceptics predicted chaos, but traffic in the centre decreased. The residents of Seoul adapted, many swapping to the subway.
Part of the vision behind the move was to restore 
Buried rivers have also been restored in Seattle, New York and Sheffield (above). But we need to go further by expanding on today’s 
Cycle-share schemes are proliferating throughout the world. Pioneered in in Lyon in 2005, the idea spread quickly to Stockholm, Seville, Paris, Montreal, Mexico City, 
Travel to Barcelona and you cannot fail to see the distinctive red and white Bicing bikes, popular with tourists and locals alike. Just two years after the scheme started in 2007, nearly 40,000 bike trips were being made per day.
Audrey de Nazelle was part of a team that studied the pros and cons and found the health benefit of using the bikes 
But you don’t need to cycle to see these gains: walking is nearly as good.
Active travel is the best solution, because you can get the most bang for your buck
With a quarter of car trips in England being for under than two miles, there is a massive potential for people to increase their active travel. “Active travel is the best solution, because you can get the most bang for your buck,” says De Nazelle, now at Imperial College London. “In studies comparing health benefits from technological approaches to reduce air pollution with walk/bike scenarios, we find 30 times greater benefits from physical activity.”
Reducing our dependence on road transport gives a quadruple benefit, improving our health, tackling air and noise pollution and reducing emissions. Our smog free-city therefore needs to be designed to reduce the need to travel for work and everyday essentials, and to make walking, cycling and taking electrically powered public transport the easiest options for getting about.
The good news is that it is already happening. Dutch cities did not become
Increasingly, 
Wherever people burn solid fuel at home, there are problems with air pollution. This is especially the case across Africa and Asia, but wood smoke also causes problems for cities in New Zealand, southern Australia and the western US and Canada. Polish towns struggle with coal smoke. In London, despite the lessons of the 
When wood-burning reached nearly 40% of Montreal’s particle emissions, 
Poorly controlled industry was one of the main sources of the air pollution that caused almost 
“There is a tremendous desire among firms for improved air quality, both for the health of their workforce and in terms of recruitment,” says Ruth Calderwood, air quality manager of the City of London Corporation. “People increasingly want to work for companies that put their environmental impact at the top of the agenda.”
The smog-free city of the future needs to manage deliveries just as it needs integrated public transport
Businesses are therefore working together to make the streets better for their customers and employees to walk and cycle in.
A cargo bike delivery scheme has been launched to help businesses in central London tackle air pollution by shifting deliveries away from diesel vans. Photograph: City of London
Businesses close to London’s Tower Bridge created a modular micro-park that could be installed in a parking space for a week, or a year. The 
The impact of business goes further. Diesel lorries are excluded for now from 
The smog-free city of the future needs to manage deliveries just as it needs integrated public transport. Already, some retailers are using shared delivery points and last-mile distribution with bikes or electric vehicles, while European cities are 
But pollutants can stay in the air for many days, which means creating a smog-free environment is not just a challenge for individual cities. The air Londoners breathe today might have been in Paris yesterday and could be in Amsterdam tomorrow.
The countryside in between also adds to the pollution burden. Agricultural burning was a main factor 
Our smog-free city would have to work with its neighbouring cities and 
 Gary Fuller is an air pollution scientist at King’s College London. His book