New “real world” emissions tests fail to prevent high levels of pollution from diesel cars during rush hour, according to new data.
Diesel vehicles are the main cause of the UK’s widespread levels of illegal air pollution, with the VW cheating scandal exposing the fact that 
Emissions Analytics, a respected testing firm, measured the emissions from two diesel cars on rush hour journeys into and out of London. In the most congested three-mile stretch of the evening rush hour, a VW Golf and Vauxhall Insignia both emitted far more nitrogen oxides (NOx) in their official real world tests – 42% and 118% more, respectively.
There is no suggestion that either of the cars have broken any regulations, as the “real driving emissions” (RDE) test allows the cars to be tested at different times of day, combines results from urban, rural and motorway driving and only applies to new models coming on to the market now.
Greenpeace, which 
“Instead of wasting more time and money hiding behind tests that still don’t reflect what’s happening in the real world, car companies should switch from diesel to electric and hybrid technology,” Morozzo said. “Ministers cannot rest on their laurels either – these tests do not solve the problem of air pollution, which makes a ban on new diesels long before 2040 even more crucial.”
Nick Molden, the CEO of Emissions Analytics, said: “The results show further improvements may be required for both the testing regime and for diesels to manage challenges like London’s rush hour. Other 
A spokesman for the Department of Transport said: “This government has led the way in Europe, pushing for on-road emissions tests, alongside a tough new laboratory test, to clean up air in our towns and cities. The introduction of new RDE tests this month is expected to significantly reduce average real world NOx emissions from new cars.”
Mike Hawes, chief executive of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, said the new RDE tests analyse emissions in a wide range of driving conditions and any car failing to meet the standards would be barred from sale. “This will provide consumers with the reassurance that manufacturers are delivering on air quality,” he said. “Criticising this new, highly complex and robust test based on the results of a couple of vehicles indicates a failure to understand the timeline and legal and testing process.”
A spokeswoman for the Volkswagen Group said: “The Group embraces the forthcoming RDE standards and all its products will be fully compliant.”
The UK government announced a ban on diesel vehicles from 2040 as part of a new air pollution plan it was forced to produce after being defeated twice in the courts. However, the plan, released in July, shies away from charging diesels for entering polluted areas and was condemned as 
A UN human rights report,