Eight years after her baby was lead-poisoned through breast milk, Kenya’s most prominent anti-pollution campaigner is set to finally get her day in court in a case that the UN hopes will prove a landmark for environmental defenders across 
Phyllis Omido has been threatened by thugs, arrested by police and forced into hiding for organising opposition to a lead-smelting factory in Mombasa, which 
But the NGO she founded, the Centre for Justice, Governance, and Environmental Action, has already forced the closure of the plant and is now pushing the courts to secure compensation for the victims and a clean-up of the community.
They have gathered thousands of local residents in a class action against the government and two companies – Metal Refinery EPZ Ltd and Penguin Paper and Book Company (no connection with the global publishing company) for 1.6bn Kenyan shillings (£11.5m) compensation and a clean-up of contaminated land.
Two years after the suit was launched, the plaintiffs will be called as witness for the first time on 19 March in the environment and land court.
Ever wondered why you feel so gloomy about the world - even at a time when humanity has never been this healthy and prosperous? Could it be because news is almost always grim, focusing on confrontation, disaster, antagonism and blame?
This series is an antidote, an attempt to show that there is plenty of hope, as our journalists scour the planet looking for pioneers, trailblazers, best practice, unsung heroes, ideas that work, ideas that might and innovations whose time might have come.
Readers can recommend other projects, people and progress that we should report on by contacting us at theupside@theguardian.com
“This is the biggest step since we started,” Omido told the Guardian. “The victims will finally get to tell their story in court. That’s crucial in making people realise what happened. We hope our case will be something that every environmental defender in the world can refer to when they raise issues of accountability.”
Progress has been perilous. Following 
 
The plant has been closed. Former director Hezron Awiti Bollo declined to respond to the allegations. “I cannot comment. This is a matter that is in the courts,” he told the Guardian by phone. 
Sometimes referred to as the “
“I face threats to my life because of this case,” she told the Guardian. 
Before its closure, the EPZ refinery recycled car batteries, using chemicals to extract the lead. Former workers said they were given only a flimsy face mask as protection. Neighbours said noxious smoke billowed out from the factory chimney, blackening and corroding the tin roofs of the shanty town; toxic waste leaked into a stream that ran through the village.
“People used it for cooking and washing,” said the local pastor, Anastasia Nambo. “We sometimes drank it even though it smelt rotten because we don’t have any alternative. We had no idea it was dangerous.
“Nobody told us for several years. We want compensation for those we know are affected and tests for those who do not yet know their status.”
Omido – who worked in the company office – was the first to make a connection between the factory and health problems. She started to grow concerned in 2010 when her baby son fell ill. Blood tests showed the amount of lead in his blood was 35 times above the the World Health Organisation’s level of concern, she said. Assuming this had been passed on when she nursed him, she then arranged for three more children to be tested, all of whom proved to have been contaminated. Locals also complained of unusually high numbers of miscarriages and respiratory disease.
After the factory refused to relocate and the environment ministry ignored her warnings, Omido organised demonstrations by thousands of residents, who blocked the main road between Mombasa and Nairobi with burning tyres. Many were arrested by police or beaten by factory security guards.
Phyllis Omido founded the Center for Justice Governance and Environmental Action. You can find out more about them here: 
The UN Environment Programme, based in 
Campaigns for more stringent environmental laws are being organised by, among others, the Centre for Earth Jurisprudence 
Bigger human rights groups that help environmental defenders with kidnap alarms, media support and lobbying campaigns include