A 2015 gas leak that belched toxic chemicals into the air and spread panic may have indirectly led to higher student test scores.
In the days after a gas leak was discovered in 
The gas field owner, Southern 
The air purifiers appear to have been installed in an abundance of caution. By the time SoCalGas installed them months after the gas leak, testing showed air at those schools had levels of pollutants within the normal range.
Regardless, the circumstances created an unlikely laboratory to study air quality and its impact on learning. 
There’s some dispute over the significance of those gains (an increase of .2 standard deviations in math and 0.18 in English). Vox 
But the study adds to the mounting body of research to what we intuitively know is true: polluted air is bad for brains and bodies.
Research has shown that those living close to refineries, plants and 
Despite the fact a state law passed in 2003 prohibits school districts from building new schools within 500ft of a freeway, tens of thousands of 
A 
, as is true elsewhere, people of color and those living in poor neighborhoods 
in the American Journal of Public Health found alarming disparities: Hispanic people were 6.2 times more likely than whites to live in the zip codes that saw the worst pollution; African Americans were 5.8 times more likely. Native Americans, Asian and Pacific Islanders, and multiracial individuals were all worse off than white people.
The problem was most pronounced in the San Joaquin Valley and near Los Angeles, data showed.
In the San Joaquin Valley, California’s agricultural center, 
In Boyle Heights, an east Los Angeles community where more than 90% of residents are Hispanic, children grow up around a tangle of freeways, four rail yards emitting diesel exhaust, body shops and chrome-platers.
Experts say that air filters can help clean the air, but can’t filter out all particles and caution against looking to them as fix, the 
Similarly, while filtered air is no panacea for schools, studying its impact is part of a growing awareness that myriad factors outside of school affect learning, and an example of willingness to look to unlikely places to address problems – whether that means