oing the laundry for a family of four every week has always been tedious, but now it is burdened by knowing that almost every item we wash is releasing hundreds of thousands of tiny synthetic fibers into our waterways and the ocean beyond.
Like most people, I only learned about plastic microfiber pollution in the last couple of years. I had never really even thought about it, beyond wondering where the bizarre lint scraped from the dryer filter comes from. Washing machines produce a similar emission, but we don’t see it because it gets washed down the drain.
Thanks to increasingly high-profile research, we know that decades of washing synthetic clothes has contributed to vast, irreversible plastic pollution, with microscopic fibers now found embedded in 
And then there’s the discovery of synthetic fibers in 
There is limited research so far on the impact of microfibers on human health, but previous studies do indicate the possible 
Other researchers have focused on the damage caused to marine life when they eat these fibers, with animals from 
It’s a global problem with no obvious solution and yet, like climate change, it’s everybody’s responsibility
“This is a really tough issue because it’s a global problem with no obvious solution and yet, like climate change, it’s everybody’s responsibility,” says Katie Christiansen, who leads various environmental research project for Montana-based not-for-profit 
There are things we can do in our own homes to make a difference, she tells me. Common sense says we should simply wash clothes only when really necessary, and fiber-collecting devices such as the 
More speculative advice – not backed up by solid academic research – suggests washing with cold water, using liquid instead of powder detergent and using 
But is it better to keep wearing and washing an old synthetic garment, or buy a new one? Does a cheap synthetic garment shed more fibers than an old, high quality synthetic fabric? There simply isn’t enough research to say, though we do know that fast fashion is an enormous contributor to global pollution.
Buying clothes exclusively made of natural fibers is one option, but cultivating more cotton or grazing more sheep has its own environmental consequences. Plus we’ve become reliant on synthetic fibers for things like waterproof clothing and performance gear. A few companies are offering high-performance alternatives, making 
I’m hardly a walking advert for fast (or indeed any kind of) fashion, but we have cut down on the quantity of new clothing we buy and get much of it secondhand. We wash our loads cold using a Cora Ball, and I try to encourage my kids not to use their clothes as napkins so that we can get another day’s wear out of them. We now dry our clothes outside on a line so they don’t get beaten up as much. (Despite our near perfect drying weather I feel like the only person in my northern California neighborhood that does this. In England most of our neighbors dried their clothes outside, doggedly leaving it out for a week in the hope it would actually dry between rainstorms.) I’m also about to invest $140 in a washing machine filter. But – will any of this help?
Few researchers have studied microfibers longer than professor Richard 
“The evidence so far is that we could achieve a lot through better design,” Thompson says. “It’s fundamental. Think about what happened with microbeads in cosmetics – some individual containers had 3m microbeads in them. Did nobody at the design stage ask where those would all go? With clothes, we need a better understanding of how to design them to last longer and shed less.”
Some clothing companies are taking the issue seriously. Patagonia, which has commissioned 
Meanwhile, a handful of Japanese manufacturers have already outfitted their washing machines with microfiber 
After 20 years researching this issue, Thompson says the view of industry and academia is united; the focus should be on stopping the flow of microfiber pollution into the oceans. How, exactly, that happens to open to debate, he says. “The gaping hole is the specifics of what we do about it.” He points to some 
For now, I’m doing what I can at home. When I ask Thompson what he thinks about washing machine filters, he’s cautious because there has not been much research about their efficacy. Eventually he says I should just give it a try, but politely reminds me not to clean the filter by – yes – rinsing it down the sink.