here is an ever-growing body of scientific evidence that gardens and gardening are good for our physical, mental and social wellbeing. Having something to nurture brings a sense of unpressured purpose to our lives. And if you choose the right plants and design, you can enhance the wellbeing your garden provides.
A considered, layered approach to planting can block traffic noise; the right trees and shrubs can combat pollution; certain flowers can keep pollen counts low, while still encouraging bees and insects; and scented plants can reduce stress. Here’s how to do it.
) has dense natural form and a large surface area through its delicate needle-like foliage. It’s as good for topiary as it is for a formal hedge.
) leaves provide air-filtering qualities. It has beautiful yellow foliage in autumn.
) is an underrated native, and a popular choice for hedgerow mixes. It also provides a thorny retreat and protection for nesting birds. 
), with its tiny leaf form, provides a fine filter for air particles. It’s robust, and suitable for both roadsides and ornamental settings.
) is brilliant for adding impactful height and structure in relative confinement; its dense foliage is great at absorbing sound.
) helps mask noise with lance-shaped leaves that rustle in the breeze.
) holds beautiful form and great leaf colour. The ovate leaf shape is effective in limiting noise.
) is a great hedging plant that can fit in tight spaces. If placed near a source of noise (a road, say), its dense spreading habit can dampen sound.
) has beautifully scented white flowers and a low pollen count. Allow it to clad a boundary fence or pergola to great effect.
) Although laden with pollen, its bell-shaped flowers act as cups that hold it inside. Given the height the flower spikes reach, they can also be placed at the back of a border.
) is a deciduous tree that produces clusters of white flowers in spring and red berries in early autumn, providing long-lasting interest throughout the season.
) A therapeutic garden classic, fantastic for improving concentration, reducing stress and anxiety, increasing relaxation and improving mood. Plant near a back door or seating areas for maximum exposure.
) A great robust ground cover that, if planted along the edge of a path or gaps within paving, will release its beautiful scent when stepped on.
) sits daintily within grasses and among other perennials. It makes a delicious tea and aids sleep. 
Your Wellbeing Garden by Alistair Griffiths and Matt Keightley is published by RHS/DK, at £16.99. To order a copy for £14.27 go to