oe to those who make unjust laws, to those who issue oppressive decrees, to deprive the poor of their rights and withhold justice from the oppressed of my people” (Isaiah 10:1). I was reminded of this verse from the Bible when 
Reserve is home to the Pontchartrain Works facility, the only chemical plant in America to produce chloroprene, a likely carcinogen, that has spewed from the plant for almost 50 years. US government science has indicated this makes the risk of cancer in that area 50 times higher than the national average.
What is happening in Reserve, 
It is a clear example of what I describe as “policy violence”, which disproportionately affects poor communities of every race, but especially poorer communities of color. The plant’s operators, first the chemicals giant DuPont and now the Japanese corporation Denka, have for decades benefited from Louisiana’s lax environmental rules and tax breaks to essentially target a community for profit.
It has happened for generations across political lines. Both Democrats and Republicans have chosen corporate process over people’s lives in Reserve, and elsewhere in the area between New Orleans and Baton Rouge known locally as Cancer Alley. But would any politician; a governor of 
Often, elected representatives in this region will say that these polluting giants are necessary because they create jobs. To them I say the answer is simple: invest in clean energy.
The history of state-sanctioned oppression in Reserve has gone back for hundreds of years. The Pontchartrain Works facility is built on the 
But just as these forms of oppression were made legal by the state, so, too, did people with a clear moral conscience fight against them. There can never be an acceptance of exploitation, of death from cancer and pollution.
Slavery was fought with an abolition movement. Jim Crow was opposed by civil rights leaders. This era of toxic pollution must be stopped too.
Many people in Reserve, and elsewhere in Cancer Alley, have been fighting this for years, all too often ignored by their elected representatives. It is particularly telling that Louisiana has 
I would challenge every so-called “pro-life” politician in Louisiana who is not also advocating on behalf of the citizens of Reserve to rethink that moniker.
All of this is why I will come to Reserve later this month.
Our movement, the Poor People’s Campaign, is built from the bottom up and aims to shift the moral narrative around this country. We want to make sure people don’t just hear the facts and figures about 
Too often, corporate exploitation and government failures occur in the darkness, away from the media spotlight. We must expose what is happening there to the light now.
We hope the people in Reserve will become part of our nationwide struggle.
Cancertown: A Conversation on the most toxic air in America – a series of events in New Orleans and Reserve