ooking back, it seems insane. Bluntly put, we took a known poison and – for three quarters of a century – used it in machines that puffed it out in breathable form. Then we drove them millions of miles a day, all over the world, regularly dosing billions of people with the toxin.
Now the full effects of using lead in petrol – surely the greatest ever mass poisoning experiment – are becoming clear, almost exactly 35 years after an award-winning 
, published in the 
Researchers at four North American universities, led by Bruce Lanphear, of Simon Fraser University in Vancouver, studied the fate of 14,289 people whose blood had been tested in an official US survey between 1988 and 1994. Four fifths of them had harboured levels of the toxic metal below what has, hitherto, been thought safe.
The study found that deaths, especially from cardiovascular disease, increased markedly with exposure, even at the lowest levels. It concluded that lead kills 412,000 people a year – accounting for 18% of all US mortality, not much less than the 483,000 who perish as a result of smoking.
Philip Landrigan, of New York’s Mount Sinai School of Medicine, possibly the world’s top expert on pollution’s effect on health, endorses the study and 
Of course, we suspected none of this when this newspaper campaigned against lead back in the early 1980s. We pressed for a ban because of increasing evidence – dismissed by the scientific establishment – that low levels of the toxic metal were damaging children’s brains, lowering IQ and increasing disruptive behaviour.
The danger of high lead levels has been known at least since the second century BC, when the Greek physician, Discorides, noted that it made “the mind give way”. Some historians even believe that lead-lined wine vats helped cause the decline of the Roman empire.
An especially nasty form of the metal, tetraethyl lead, was first put in petrol to prevent car engines “knocking” in 1922. By the early 1970s, more than 100,000 tons of it were put into American vehicles alone each year. By then, a lone scientist, 
He was ridiculed and marginalised by other scientists. Slowly, however, people took up the cause, most notably a Wimbledon housewife, 
British children had to be shown to be affected as well as US ones – as if they were different species
Her hand was strengthened by a meticulous US study that showed conclusively that lead knocked several points off children’s IQ. Yet, even before it was published, four leading British authorities circulated a paper attacking it. And the study’s author, 
With leading scientists still resisting the evidence of effects on children, a royal commission advised that action should be taken, short of absolute proof, as there were enough grounds to suggest the danger was real. First, the rest of Europe, then almost every nation on Earth, followed, and levels in blood have fallen worldwide.
It was not before time. Since then, low levels of lead have also been linked to high blood pressure, stroke, heart and kidney disease, ADHD and accelerated ageing. There is even good, if surprising, evidence that it increased juvenile crime: many studies have shown rates mirroring the rise and fall of lead in petrol. In 2002, the World 
Worryingly, the “precautionary principle” that led to the phase-out, and is enshrined in EU law, is in danger from Brexit. Some industries and rightwing politicians have long campaigned against it, demanding much more evidence. So far at least, it has not been incorporated into withdrawal measures. On Thursday, the environment secretary, Michael Gove, promised at a conference organised by Prosperity UK to strengthen, rather than weaken, pollution controls on leaving the EU. But he failed to give a specific reassurance on the precautionary principle.
This is important because undue delay kills. Absolute proof of damage comes from counting corpses. If Britain had waited for it before taking action on lead in petrol, this week’s alarming news would have been more devastating still.