he fatberg that went on display this month 
Unsurprisingly, curator Vyki Sparkes is looking pretty pleased with herself, and is already talking about a world tour for her prized object – a slice of the 
The Whitechapel fatberg was a source of international fascination because of its size: 250 metres long (the length of Tower Bridge, as the publicists helpfully point out), weighing 130 tonnes and as hard as rock. Thames Water’s “flushers” – the men who keep the sewers running – had to dismantle it using high-pressure hoses and pickaxes. It was a monster, and even though only a tiny fragment of it remains at the museum, its monstrousness still both appeals and appals.
It is a piece of organic matter, and small flies hatch out of it and fly around the glass container, to the consternation of onlookers. While I’m there, one young girl recoils at the sight of the lump of hardened sewage and screws up her face in horror, while her grandmother likens it to the creature in Alien and wonders if it will burst out of its case. It is alive and evolving, that is the fascinating and horrible thing about it, and we all created it by throwing away fats, oil, grease, wipes and all the other rubbish that finds its way into the sewers. There is a chocolate wrapper sticking out of the fatberg brick – Sparkes reckons it’s a Double Decker – adding an unexpected splash of colour to what otherwise resembles a piece of yellowish-grey lunar rock.
The exhibition is fun – hence the fudge, the fluffy rats and the “Don’t feed the fatberg” T-shirts – but it’s also serious. Own up, whoever chucked that Double Decker wrapper down a drain. Sparkes tells me she didn’t want to lecture anyone in the exhibition she has built around the fatberg, but she is quietly inviting us to consider the Frankenstein’s monster we have helped to create. “If we continue to put fat, oil, grease and non-flushable things into the sewers, we are going to grow these monster fatbergs,” says Sharon Robinson-Calver, the head of conservation at the museum. “They have got the potential to flood the city, and they are hugely costly for the water companies to remove.”
Are they the result of mass selfishness? “I think it’s more a mass misunderstanding on our part,” she says. “In the first week of the exhibition, from what I’ve seen of the feedback, people don’t realise we are contributing to the problem. One of the reasons for that is things that are labelled as being ‘flushable’, like face wipes and baby wipes, might be flushable but they are not biodegradable. People are now starting to realise that we are part of the problem, but they have been unwittingly contributing to it rather than doing it deliberately.”
Robinson-Calver explains what we know about the process by which fatbergs form. “When the fats, oils and grease are in the sewer’s alkaline environment, they combine with all the material that gets down there, such as wet wipes and nappies, and form a mass that becomes calcified [by interaction with calcium in the sewer water] and solid. It becomes like concrete and can’t easily be broken up. The teams working in the sewers have to break them up using hand tools because the high-pressure jet hoses can’t break it down sufficiently.”
Fatbergs tend to begin forming against the rough edges of London’s brick-built sewer walls, or where the sewer bends. The vast size of London’s Victorian sewer system has made it a particular breeding ground for monster fatbergs, but it is not only a 
Disposal of fats, oils and grease (known as Fogs in the sewage business) has long been recognised as a problem within the industry, but the public remained largely oblivious to their capacity to bung up sewers. Only when a 15-tonne ball of congealed fat was found 
“Nobody cares about Fogs,” says Sparkes. “You can talk about Fogs until the cows come home. But start using the term ‘fatberg’ and it comes alive; people can visualise it.” She also thinks the fact it was discovered in Whitechapel was a factor, summoning up nightmarish visions of Victorian sewers, the underground city in which evil flourishes. “They are the repository of primitive and repulsive, or simply outmoded, things,” said Peter Ackroyd of the sewers in his book London Under. “They represent putrefaction and dissolution … The tunnels sweat as if in a fever.” Starting from that sense of horror, Sparkes says she hopes to spark “a conversation about London – London life, our infrastructure and our habits. I didn’t want to tell people how to behave. I wanted to use material evidence and lay things out without hectoring people.”
The exhibition has been a godsend for the sewage business, getting across the message that chucking fats down the sink, wet wipes down the toilet and Double Decker wrappers down the drain is eventually going to block your local sewer. At Thames Water’s head office in Reading, spokeswoman Becky Trotman is wearing a “Don’t feed the fatberg” badge acquired at the exhibition launch. “People are becoming more aware of the problem and this has worked really well for us,” she says. “But we still need people to look at it and realise that everybody can do their bit. People know fatbergs are bad, they know about the problems they cause, but they still think it is somebody else’s problem and if the rest of the world stops putting their fat down their sink, I can still put my little bit down on a Sunday and it doesn’t matter. If we’ve got 8 million people in London all thinking like that, we’re not getting anywhere. It is all right everybody being aware, but we need people to change their behaviour.”
Thomas Collin is an engineer working on a PhD that examines “Fog management” (he really should have named it fatberg exorcism). He is attached to Cranfield University, which has a specialist Fog team and is planning to build two scale models of sewers that will enable it to analyse the way in which fatbergs grow. But as his PhD is funded by Thames Water, he works mainly out of their treatment works in Reading and his findings will be a key part of the company’s war on fatbergs.
Collin is French – he tells me the French have no word for “fatberg” and have adopted the English term – and is halfway through his PhD. At the risk of stating the obvious, he says the key is to stop oils and fats getting into the sewers in the first place. He points out that the US is way ahead of the UK in using grease traps to filter out Fogs at source. That is also the point at which oils and fats are at their purest – they get broken down once they interact with other materials in the sewer and are solidified by the calcium in the water. That pure oil – straight from the chip pan or Sunday roast – is the easiest and most valuable for conversion into biofuel. Catch it at source and you stop fatbergs developing, and have a ready source of fuel for the No 24 bus.
He argues that legislation in the UK needs to be tightened to stop Fogs being tipped down sinks, especially in restaurants, hotels, hospitals and care homes, the places that produce them in huge quantities. “There is some confusion in the legislation because it doesn’t clearly say oil and grease,” he explains. Instead, it stipulates that nothing should be put into a sewer that interrupts its flow, and what that actually means is being tested in court. Collin says the US has installed large underground grease traps in premises that generate industrial quantities of Fogs.
It is, however, unlikely that it will ever be economic or practical to insist on the introduction of grease traps in homes. Stopping domestic users putting oils into the sewer system will depend on a public education programme, and on councils being willing to extend recycling to include oils and fats. Trotman says people don’t realise that washing up greasy plates or putting them into a dishwasher still ends up putting fats and oils into the sewers. No amount of washing-up liquid will solve the problem; the fats have to be scraped off and recycled.
Alison Browne, a lecturer in human geography at the University of Manchester, and a group of sustainability experts at Manchester and the University of Sheffield recently 
Browne highlights the success of Yorkshire Water’s 
Fatbergs have become a symbol of the way we live now – hence the desire of the Museum of London to put one on display – and overcoming them will necessitate change on the part of consumers and the companies that supply them. They represent the way we approach food, and indeed the way we approach life. “We live in a throwaway society,” says Trotman. There was a time when