hat if the water that came out of your taps made you – and thousands of others – ill? How would people respond? Voters would quite rightly demand that the government act decisively to address the problem. Heads would roll in the boardrooms of the big water companies. And demand for alternatives such as bottled water would spike. Yet scientists and campaigners – validated by the UK courts – have been telling us for years that the air we breathe is both lethal and illegal, and the response from our politicians has been negligible.
Invisible pollutants – such as 
The government, at the behest of the UK courts, has published three national air pollution plans in as many years, each aiming to bring the UK into compliance with EU law on pollution levels. All of these have been 
This raises the question: why has the response been so feeble? The answer: dealing with air pollution means dealing with its causes, and one of the biggest sources of air pollution is cars. Over a third of pollution across the UK is 
This is challenging stuff. It’s easy for people to switch from tap to bottled water but getting out of our cars is a different matter. It’s not just that people see it as inconvenient: they deem it an affront to their human rights and their identity. After all, 
Some of the bravest politicians have started to confront this reality. In London, the mayor, Sadiq Khan, is bringing in 
An extra charge on people who want to use their car is seen as a burden. The benefits are real but quite literally invisible: marginally cleaner air. Health improves as a result, but most people will not grasp the link to air pollution. It’s only when people can see and feel the difference to their commute that they will really appreciate the benefits of tackling air pollution and getting out of their car.
In this light, addressing air pollution becomes a much bigger project: one that fundamentally aims to transform our cities and the way we all live. The first step is pedestrianising our city centres and investing in green public spaces. This should make it easier and more enjoyable for people to walk or cycle to work. Public transport – buses, trains and trams – needs to provide a more comprehensive service, be less crowded and become quicker.
This is far from impossible. Oslo, in Norway, plans to permanently 
Instead of seeing air pollution as a liability, the environment minister Michael Gove should turn it into an opportunity. He should bring forward the 
This is not just the right thing to do for our physical health but also our climate and – with congestion due to 
 Harry Quilter-Pinner is director of strategy at SCT, a homelessness and addictions charity in east London. He is also a research fellow at IPPR, the UK’s progressive thinktank. He writes here in a personal capacity