n Friday, thousands of adults across the world will take part in the 
With the 
The report also finds that the NHS produces higher emissions than the global average for healthcare and is responsible for 5.4% of the UK’s total carbon emissions, equivalent to the greenhouse gas emissions of 11 coal-fired power stations. Its emissions are not much lower than those for both aviation, and agriculture, forestry and land use in the UK (each 6.5% according to 
The NHS was one of the first national health systems to produce a 
Our actions must cover the types of drugs we purchase, the energy we use in our buildings and the waste we generate
But Kristian Steele, an associate at Arup and one of the HCWH report’s authors, says the findings show that the 
This summer, more than 1,000 doctors signed an 
“While the UK 
Yet, so far, only two NHS bodies have declared a climate emergency: 
Coming from a 
A detailed plan is due to be published by the end of the year. As 
Newcastle upon Tyne’s declaration – which came in June, before Greater Manchester’s – made it the first healthcare organisation in the world to declare a climate emergency and pledge to become carbon neutral by 2040. Newcastle has been in the vanguard of sustainability for decades. The trust installed combined heat and power plants in its hospitals in the late 1990s and all electricity bought comes from 100% renewable sources. It has sent zero waste to landfill since 2011 and recycles more than 40% of non-clinical waste (the average in the NHS is 23%). All procurement contracts include sustainability criteria, while hospital cafes and restaurants provide compostable cutlery and plates. The trust has commissioned new staff, patient and visitor electric bus services for 2020 and already has electric catering and estates vehicles.
But it is in the clinical areas – dialysis for kidney patients and anaesthetics in its operating theatres – that Newcastle really stands out. Its “renal green group” has been working to reduce the environmental impact of dialysis since 2010. It recycles packaging and used dialysis fluid canisters, while energy-saving measures include the retrofitting of heat recovery technology within dialysis machines. The trust has also pioneered ways to cut greenhouse gas emissions from anaesthetics, which make up 
, a fellow in environmentally sustainable anaesthesia for the Association of Anaesthetists and the Centre for Sustainable Healthcare, based at Newcastle upon Tyne hospitals, saysreducing the use of Desflurane can make a real difference. “Since 2016, we have cut emissions from anaesthetic gases by 45%, through education about the environmental impact that our different gases have, supporting our colleagues to make informed choices about their clinical practice and using behavioural nudges to reduce unintentional use of our more harmful agents.”
From November she hopes to start introducing technology to capture these gases, and support staff in using alternative techniques with less emissions. She is also working with colleagues to improve the sustainability of operating theatres by cutting energy use and waste, reducing single-use plastics through recycling, and procuring more sustainable and reusable clinical items.
Jonny Groome, co-founder of the Greener Anaesthesia and Sustainability Project and anaesthetic registrar at Barts Health NHS trust, points out that 40% of waste in operating theatres is a high-quality product that could be recycled. Unfortunately, most waste ends up being labelled as “infectious clinical waste”, he says, and gets incinerated at a high financial and environmental cost. 
Transport is a big contributor to NHS emissions. The NHS accounts for almost 10bn road journeys each year – around 3.5% of all road travel. The 
Some trusts are introducing energy-saving measures to reduce car journeys such as lift-share schemes for staff, free shuttle buses between sites, and cycle-to-work schemes, as well as building staff accommodation within walking distance of work. Sussex Community NHS foundation trust has introduced a “care without carbon” mantra throughout the organisation. It developed an internal network to encourage departments to re-use furniture and unwanted office products, opened a travel bureau in 2013 to encourage public transport and cycling and has introduced a car lease scheme for staff with a cap on car emissions. As a result, emissions are down by 37%, says Susie Vernon, associate director of sustainability at Sussex Community NHS foundation trust.
Oxford University hospitals NHS foundation trust provides a cycle-to-work scheme, as well as a 
Stephen Powis, medical director for NHS England, says: “As part of our long-term plan, the NHS is doing its bit to protect our environment with practical measures like reducing the need for road traffic for appointments, phasing out coal in our buildings, supporting staff to use bike and car hire schemes and making use of safe, greener treatments including low-emission inhalers where it’s appropriate and good for patients.”
“For more than 70 years the health service in England has protected our country’s health with world-leading treatments, research and staff, but we also are doing more to protect our patients’ environment and help prevent ill health, which will not only safeguard the NHS and public health for future years, but save taxpayers money into the bargain.”
In the end, though, the best way to cut emissions is to keep patients healthier. “Nothing could be less environmentally sustainable than delivering interventions that do not work,” says Chris Naylor at The King’s Fund. “Arguably the best way to cut emissions would be to change the way we do healthcare, to prevent illness in the first place.”