Women of childbearing age from around the world have been found to have high levels of mercury, a potent neurotoxin which can seriously harm unborn children.
The 
The most extreme levels were found in women from sites in Indonesia where mercury is heavily used in small-scale gold mining and where fish is also commonly eaten. Such gold mining leads to serious mercury pollution and is also a source of harm to women in Kenya, Paraguay and Myanmar. 
Industrial pollution is another source of mercury, and the research found this affected women in Nepal, Nigeria and Ukraine.
“Millions of women and children in communities 
Cook Islands resident Imogen Ingram, from the Island Sustainability Alliance, learned that her own mercury levels were two-and-half times higher than the US Environmental Protection Agency’s safety threshold. “It is really alarming to learn that you have, without knowing, passed on mercury to your child,” she said. “Mercury contamination across the Pacific Islands is high because we eat fish. But I do not want to be told not to eat fish. 
“Mercury contamination is ubiquitous in marine and freshwater systems around the world,” said David Evers, executive director at the 
A global agreement to tackle mercury pollution, the 
“There are many many loopholes in the trade in mercury,” said Lee Bell, from Ipen, and who led the new research. “It has been an eye-opener that the problem is just as widespread as it is. There are still many things to be resolved [in the convention] and it is not moving fast enough.” Bell urges all countries to follow the US and EU in introducing unilateral bans on exporting mercury.
The study focused on women aged 18-44, as they are most at risk because developing foetuses are so sensitive to mercury, he said. “Women have to be very careful, in any country, of what type of fish and how much they eat,” he said. The UK’s 
The Ipen work expanded a smaller study it conducted with the UN Environment Programme to test hair samples from more than 1,000 women from 36 places in 25 countries. In the Pacific Islands, which are far from all industrial sources of mercury pollution, 86% of the women had levels above the 1ppm safety limit, with most over three times that. 
Above 1ppm of mercury, brain, heart and kidney damage can occur. The most recent 
Overall, in the places affected by small-scale gold mining, more than half the women exceeded the 1ppm limit, with results of up to nine times the limit found in Indonesia. In industrial areas, 20% of the women had high levels of mercury. In Alaska, where seals are an important food for the indigenous women tested, a third had high levels.
More than 370 sites polluted with mercury around the world have been identified by Pure Earth, a pollution clean-up group. Its global policy director, Andrew McCartor, said: ”Our program clearly demonstrates that mercury contamination is widespread, and the new study from Ipen and BRI shows that it is taking a significant toll on our most vulnerable populations.” 
McCartor said, as well as stopping the release of mercury, more work is needed to clean up toxic sites: “Many of these sites are essentially orphaned with no plans or funding for cleanup, poisoning generation after generation. The remediation of contaminated sites is crucial, but often ignored and underfunded.”