Almost 150 years after he died, ending his life exhausted and depressed at apparent failure, the Irish artist Daniel Maclise has been vindicated: it was London filth, not his technique, which tarnished his reputation and the surface of his two masterpieces, the biggest paintings in the 
“It is a tale of horror and disappointment,” said Malcolm Hay, curator of works of art in the palace. “The one thing I hope we can do is to turn back the clock and give poor Maclise his due.”
The unveiling of the two gigantic paintings in 1865 – 100 sq metres, heaving with soldiers and sailors, guns and horses, depicting the meeting of the victorious generals Wellington and Blücher after the battle of Waterloo, and the death of Nelson at Trafalgar – should have been the greatest moment of of the artist’s life. Each had taken a year to paint and years of research. Instead his work was greeted with moans about the cost and shock that the surface of the earlier painting was turning black.
A large conservation project has now started to improve on at least 30 previous attempts to make the paintings look better. Conservators are gently removing grime-infused wax and discoloured varnishes as well as the soot and dust trapped in the layers. Where the wax cannot be cleared without causing further damage, gentle warming to melt it slightly can cure the white bloom which makes the paintings even murkier.
Originally the paintings were full of vivid details in red and blue. Now, on a dull day, the yellow overhead lamps help turn them sepia. Depictions of the weapons, uniform and equipment – meticulously researched by the artist, who interviewed veterans, read accounts of both campaigns, and studied relics including Wellington’s sword and the real coat Nelson was wearing when a French sniper landed the fatal shot – are all lost in the gloom. However, better lighting, experiments have proved, will also add to the dramatic difference. 
Maclise was the envy of every other artist in England when he won the commission to create two enormous frescoes, each costing more than £3,000, to decorate the Royal Gallery in the House of Lords when the palace was rebuilt after the fire of 1834. His full-scale drawings were a sensation at the Royal Academy, and 
 The Fine Arts Commission, led by Prince Albert, had insisted on the works being in fresco – seen, according to Hay, as the noblest art form. Albert sent Maclise to Germany to study the technique, which involves painting on dry plaster then spraying with a fixative. But by the time the paintings were complete Albert was dead, and the public was fed up with the endless palace work and its costs. 
The blackened paintings were attributed to the painter’s technique and materials, and Albert’s alien German fresco. “I think there was a very cold wind blowing on Maclise after Albert’s death,” Hay said.
The conservation work, which has involved research by academics in Germany on the fresco technique, has absolved both men of blame. Despite damage from leaking windows, settlement cracks probably dating from the 19th century, and the near destruction of the gallery in the second world war when masonry from a bombed tower crashed through the roof, the frescoed plaster is still sound.
“None of it was poor Maclise’s fault,” said Caroline Babington, collections care manager. “The place was still a building site and the whole city was burning coal. It wasn’t the paint turning black, it was just filthy 
The work will cost about £100,000 – but will also provide a condition check for the paintings before the project is dwarfed by the epic and bitterly contested restoration of the entire decaying Palace of Westminster, tentatively costed at between £3.5bn and £5.7bn.