Facing public pressure to rein in its pollution, a Japanese chemical manufacturer has instead launched an aggressive, years-long campaign to undermine the science showing that its compounds could cause cancer, according to newly released documents reviewed by the Guardian.
Chloroprene, the primary constituent of the synthetic rubber neoprene, is the major air pollutant in the town of 
The town, and the chemicals plant operated by Denka Performance Elastomer, is the subject of a year-long Guardian reporting project, 
Robert Taylor, director of the Concerned Citizens of St John – the community group leading the fight for clean air in the town – said a reversal of the EPA classification would be “devastating” for his fellow residents.
“I think it’s very audacious of them to challenge all of this work that the government has done. To me it’s indicative of how callous these people are and how they really just don’t care about the people here,” Taylor, who has numerous relatives that have died of cancer he blames on the plant, said. “If they are successful it would leave us at the mercy of this plant.”
In 2010, the EPA 
For years Denka has been quietly fighting to discount the underlying science that proves chloroprene is a dangerous carcinogen even in low amounts. Denka argues that lifetime chloroprene exposure levels could be 156 times higher than what the EPA has determined and that the chemical shouldn’t be considered a likely carcinogen.
A series of documents, shared with the Guardian and released to lawyers for Reserve residents under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), shows the company and its contractors have pursued EPA scientists and pushed them to accept their own new modeling, which Denka has offered multiple new peer-reviewed studies to try to bolster.
 EPA officials resisting Denka’s efforts.
A spokesman for Denka said the company is “dedicated to sound science” and stated it has “worked collaboratively with EPA to seek EPA’s reconsideration of the faulty science” underlying the 2010 classification.
The plant, named the Pontchartrain Works facility, was built by the US chemicals giant DuPont in the mid-1960s, and 
Denka’s campaign began shortly after Donald Trump won election and just days before he took office, with an “urgent” memo to the presidential transition team on 17 January 2017, accusing EPA of “using faulty and highly inflated risk data”.
The company said the EPA’s findings about the dangers of chloroprene would hurt its bottom line, according to another set of public records obtained by the Sierra Club under the FOIA.
“These studies will result in unwarranted compliance costs that pose a direct threat to [Denka’s] ability to keep its facility open and to keep jobs in Louisiana,” Denka said.
A Denka spokesman pointed to the $35m spent by the company to install emissions controls in recent years. The company said these installations have reduced chloroprene emissions by 86%, 
Emails show lawyers working for Denka repeatedly seeking meetings with top EPA officials throughout 2017. In September 2017, Ramboll Environ, Denka’s consultants, testified at a Republican-run House hearing to criticize the chloroprene review as bad science.
Denka’s crusade continued through 2019, new records reviewed by the Guardian show. Ken McQueen, EPA’s regional administrator over Louisiana, met with the company as recently as 30 October.
A Denka spokesman said the purpose of this meeting was “to introduce plant management and executives” to EPA officials and that meeting included a short update on Denka’s request for reconsideration of the agency’s chloroprene findings.
Emails earlier this year show EPA officials repeatedly pushing back on Denka’s campaign, arguing that the new studies Denka presented weren’t enough and that the full model would have to undergo internal peer review at the agency.
The EPA has since paused its reconsideration of chloroprene until that peer review is complete, the agency confirmed by providing the Guardian with a letter written from the air quality planning director, Peter Tsirigotis, to Louisiana’s environment secretary, Chuck Carr Brown, on 23 September.
Tsirigotis noted that EPA’s chloroprene review is not an air quality standard and is not used directly to regulate plants.
“Risk is one factor that we need to consider, along with information on costs, energy, safety, control technologies and other relevant factors,” Tsirigotis said.