Pristina is a city of constant renewal. Not only is Kosovo’s main city the youngest capital in 
Although the war emptied the city of most of its ethnic Albanian inhabitants, the physical damage was confined to a few buildings. Following the war, most of the Serb residents left for nearby Gracanica or points further north, and the UN assumed control over government institutions. But crime and corruption reigned, including over the city’s urban landscape. In 2000, architect and urban planning chief Rexhep Luci, who was trying to impose law and order in a city where wealthy individuals were developing property illegally, was gunned down. His murder has still not been solved, and in 2014, when mayor Shpend Ahmeti assumed power 
But, illegally or not, the city has grown rapidly since the 1998-1999 war, and its new confidence was underlined in 2008 when 
 - the number of years before the birth of Christ that the Goddess on the Throne – a clay fertility goddess from the Neolithic era which has become a symbol of Pristina – is believed to have been made. 
 - The average age of 
 – The percentage of Kosovo’s GDP that pollution and treatment for related illnesses was estimated by the World Bank in 2013 to be costing the state. 
 - the number of premature deaths every year due to pollution.
The area around Pristina has been inhabited for almost 10,000 years, and grew to prominence in the medieval Serbian empire. In 1389, at the Battle of Kosovo Polje, Serbs, fighting alongside Albanian allies, lost to the Ottoman Empire, and it wasn’t until 1912 that Albanian forces took it back. But Serb forces took control, and in 1918 the city became part of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, a predecessor to Yugoslavia. In 1947, the capital was moved from Prizren to Pristina, at that time a small city of only 20,000 inhabitants who spoke Turkish; most of the Ottoman architecture was destroyed and replaced by communist structures.
Although Dua Lipa, born in the UK to parents who left Kosovo in the 1990s, was the 
Last year, Pristina’s Era Istrefi courted controversy by filming a video in a Serbian Orthodox Church located on the University of Pristina campus, which was built in the 1990s when Pristina was under a system that privileged Serbs to the detriment of Albanians. The 
Although the Ottoman chronicler Evliya Celebi came to Pristina in the 1660s and noted its “abundant vineyards and gardens,” today locals complain of a lack of green space. There are very few playgrounds or parks, and on weekends many locals take to Germia, the city’s green space to the east. 
 
A post shared by 
Kosovars remain the only Europeans west of Belarus without access to the visa-free Schengen zone. Some 10% have sought asylum in the EU since 2008, but many have stayed to build the new state. Pristina is laid-back, full of cafes and bars catering to its young population. But residents have memories of a not so distant past when power outages were common and water was restricted to a schedule. Today, electricity is regular – which sometimes seems an astonishing feat given the bundles of electric cables hanging low over rambling streets – and in 2017 mayor Ahmeti kept his biggest campaign promise by instituting 24-hour water supply.
Pristina recently rolled out a fleet of 51 brand new eco-friendly buses, which can be tracked in real time. Informal taxis and mini-buses are prevalent, but the city has no wide avenues or boulevards, meaning that during rush hour walking is almost always faster than driving. Unfortunately, the sidewalks are often usurped by parked cars, or even businesses, making life difficult for pedestrians. One (admittedly unscientific) study found that 
 on 
Last winter air pollution hit record highs, and residents were encouraged to stay indoors. This year is no better: the air quality in Pristina has been named the world’s worst, according to an app that measures the air quality at US embassies around the world. The cause? Europe’s oldest coal-fired power plant complex, built between 1965 and 1975. Located 15km from Pristina, it burns the dirty variant of lignite coal, of which Kosovo has the fifth largest reserve in the world. In December, Kosovo inked a deal with the US company ContourGlobal to build a new plant worth €1.3bn (£1.1bn), which is projected to decrease dust emissions by a factor of 25 and emit only a quarter of the current levels of carbon dioxide. But on 1 February, a day when the air quality indicators registered worse levels than the Chinese megacities of Shanghai and Hangzhou, 
 
A post shared by 
Kosovo’s official flag was unveiled 10 years ago: a blue standard bearing Kosovo’s golden outline and crowned with white stars, it is reminiscent of the EU flag. But many Albanians prefer the national flag of Albania – blood red with a black double-headed eagle. This flag was flown at an enormous roundabout opposite Hotel Victory, which features a large replica of the Statue of Liberty, and the flag’s presence has engendered heated debate, part of a larger national discussion about identity in the young country. 
, launched just after Kosovo became independent, offers news, features and opinions about life in Europe’s youngest capital. Since 2010,