A primary school is to be demolished and rebuilt in an area where pollution levels regularly breach legal limits in order to build the third runway at Heathrow, the airport’s master plan reveals.
Three other primary schools will be left just metres from the new runway, campaigners against the expansion said. The playground of one of the schools will border the new runway fence if the controversial plan to build a third runway goes ahead.
Campaigners say the relocation of Harmondsworth primary from the village of Harmondsworth, where it is surrounded by fields and farmland, to an area on the Stockley bypass in West Drayton, where air pollution monitors regularly breach legal limits, will harm children’s health.
Details of the relocation of the school are included in the airport’s master plan released on Tuesday.
: “Harmondsworth primary school will be displaced by the new runway. Land to the north of the M4 highway on Stockley Road has been identified as a suitable replacement site for the school as it is within the catchment area and has appropriate road access and connections to green areas for recreational purposes.
“This site also has the benefit of being able to accommodate early delivery to enable vacation of the existing facility in time for the commencement of construction of the new runway.”
Rob Barnstone, coordinator of Stop Heathrow Expansion, said: “How can it be allowed for a primary school to be relocated in an area with already high exposure to toxic emissions to make way for 260,000 more flights, emitting more emissions in its former location.
“We already know that emissions from Heathrow-related traffic and planes have an impact on children’s learning and exam performance. Yet the airport seem quite content in doing so. 
Details of the impact of the new runway on local primary schools are contained in the document Heathrow published at the start of a 12-week consultation on its expansion.
If it goes ahead, the expansion will leave three other schools – Cherry Lane primary, Heathrow primary and William Byrd primary – just metres from the new runway. The playground of Heathrow primary will run up against the runway fence, according to details contained in the plan.
Barnstone said the impact of noise on children’s learning was 
Geraldine Nicholson, who works in a local school and is part of the campaign to stop the expansion of the airport, said: “Considering one in three children inhale toxic air in the UK, is this government prepared to do this to our children in all of these schools? The planes will be literally a few metres above the playground.”
As well as demolishing a school, 
The land grab will far exceed the boundaries of the new airport during its development, with construction and earthwork sites set up. An estimated 20m cubic metres of earth will be moved – more than 1m lorry loads.
Friends of the Earth is continuing its legal challenge against the expansion, 
The mayor of 
A spokesperson for the mayor said: “A third runway at Heathrow would be an environmental disaster.
“Given the impact that expansion would have on our city … we have filed the necessary court document to commence the appeal process so that the mayor can continue standing up for Londoners by opposing the third runway.”
Heathrow is urging people to take part in the consultation. Emma Gilthorpe, the executive director for expansion at Heathrow, urged local people to participate 
A
“We want to further mitigate the environmental impacts of this project – that’s why we are inviting the public, local authorities, schools and experts to engage with us and have their say on our master plan.
“We are taking steps to improve local air quality by introducing our own Ultra Low Emission Zone, improving public transport links for communities surrounding the airport and enhancing green space with environmental projects including the 20km [12.5-mile] Green Loop.”