protesters say they are prepared to go to prison as they step up their campaign against the poisonous air that kills tens of thousands of people in the UK each year.
A group of campaigners including pensioners and young parents, were arrested on Monday after targeting the offices of London mayor 
The group – called Stop Killing Londoners – has 
On Monday six of them were arrested and vowed to continue their protests until Khan takes more drastic action to improve the capital’s air quality.
One of the protesters arrested, Genny Scherer, 71, said: “We all pay the price for the continuing illegal levels of air pollution. It threatens all our health and environment. I do not want to go to prison but I will if that is what it takes for our politicians to sit up and take action.”
There is growing concern about the UK’s poisonous air that causes 40,000 early deaths a year. Last week an 
The scale of 
The findings, described as “sickening” by Khan, have serious health implications – 
During Monday’s protest, 15 campaigners dressed in black and white striped suits spray-painted messages, calling for action to reduce air pollution, on the walls of the mayor’s office, on the South Bank. 
Six of them were arrested by police and taken into custody. Campaigners say the demonstration is the first of a series which will continue in the coming week.
The campaign is calling on the mayor to commit to proposals put forward by the London Coalition for Clean Air, a network of community groups representing people across 
Its demands include bringing forward the introduction of the 
Clare Bairstow, 32, a university lecturer who was arrested during Monday’s protest said: “We are simply insisting that he sits down and engages with this coalition of community groups. We will all do this again, and go to prison if necessary, until the mayor meets with community groups.”
The impact of air pollution is of growing concern globally. A separate 
The study led by academics at Duke University predicted the number of lives that could be saved, city by city, in 154 of the world’s largest urban areas if nations agree to reduce carbon emissions and limit global temperature rise to 1.5C in the near future rather than postponing the biggest emissions cuts until later, as some governments have proposed.
The mayor’s office said senior city hall officials had met the protesters twice. A spokesman added that while the mayor believed everyone has a right to protest “they must remain within the boundaries of the law”.
“He is doing all he can to clean up London’s filthy air and has laid out the boldest plans of any city in the world to tackle air pollution – including introducing