write this from St Martin’s, one of the largest 
My landlord, Andrew, sees the benefits. Both his grandparents are 92 and still active, no one he knows has asthma, and lung and heart diseases are uncommon, he says. Harold Wilson always holidayed on the neighbouring island of St Mary’s, but his pipe-smoking never caught on.
Word of the grim state of air on “mainland” UK reaches everyone here. A few days ago came reports suggesting hundreds of thousands of young people in Britain are being
For Scillonians, used to gulping fresh sea air only, this is all academic. But what can people in grossly polluted British cities do about the staggering levels of pollution, apart from escape occasionally to places like St Martin’s? How hard is it really to eliminate most pollution?
Not very, say the cities and countries that have tried to reduce it. It’s not expensive, and it can be politically popular. Indeed, all the research shows that places that reduce pollution benefit financially in both the short and long term.
As a start, we can all experience the less-polluted life. This weekend, as part of 
Birmingham, car capital of the UK, resolutely refuses to join in. Poor Brum. The effect of removing cars on a grand scale from a large city is revelatory. Aside from the rare quietness and extra space, the air smells and tastes different. It may be imaginary, but people also seem to converse and smile more. The health effects are dramatic. Brussels closed its city centre to cars last Sunday, and within hours the levels of black carbon and nitrogen dioxide in the city’s air decreased by at least 30%. Nearly everyone approved.
When the benefits are seen, the rest becomes easy. Many cities that were happy to ban cars from a few streets for a token day a year have now been emboldened by the positive response they received 
The car – at least in some EU cities – is on the run. But British and US cities are putting their faith more in technology and individual action. This approach is also beginning to work, with sales of electric cars skyrocketing. This week, we passed the milestone of 
But technology is not enough. The air will never meet even the lowest World 
Countries that have invested in pollution-free transport have reaped the benefits. Academics calculate that Dutch investment in cycling not only 
The Royal College of Physicians 
As individuals, we can learn to avoid heavily polluted streets by taking backstreets; apps can show us in real time where the pollution hotspots are; and we can avoid buying diesels or sitting in front of open fires. These all offer individual respite from the clouds of gases and particles we emit, but will not bring about real change.
We must also understand that air pollution comes not just from cars but from ships, farming, heating of houses and workplaces, and the burning of firewood and rubbish. We can wean cars off fossil fuels, but that is just the start. Ultimately, we need to both get out of our cars, and burn fewer fossil fuels.
For that to happen, we need to think very differently about how we live. On St Martin’s in the Isles of Scilly, it’s just about possible to imagine that.
 John Vidal is a former Guardian environment editor