The 
In a statement, the 
 was made with the transportation secretary, Elaine Chao, who said the decision ensures “no state has the authority to opt out of the nation’s rules, and no state has the right to impose its policies on the rest of the country”.
The move, widely opposed by critics including the former two-term state governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, represents a wider effort to restrict California’s plans to reshape the mix of vehicles on its roads. It comes before an expected decision to roll back fuel-efficiency standards set under 
“See you in court,” California’s governor, Gavin Newsom,
Newsom and other state leaders condemned the president’s latest moves. He, California’s attorney general, Xavier Becerra, and Mary Nichols, the state’s top clean air regulator, described the move as part of a “political vendetta”.
Trump criticized 
“It’s a terrible situation that’s in Los Angeles and in San Francisco,” Trump told reporters. “They have to clean it up. We can’t have our cities going to hell.”
The San Francisco mayor, London Breed, called Trump’s remarks “ridiculous”.
Breed said the city was combating a homelessness crisis by adding 1,000 beds to shelters, and wants to pass a $600m bond to build affordable housing and increase services for people with addiction and mental illness. 
The housing secretary, Ben Carson, responded by saying California’s policies on law enforcement, an overregulated housing market and 
Carson wrote: “Your letter seeks more federal dollars for California from hard-working American taxpayers but fails to admit that your state and local policies have played a major role in creating the current crisis.”
Carson’s comments came after he toured Los Angeles’s Skid Row, the centre of a crisis that numbers 60,000 homeless people in Los Angeles county alone.
The Los Angeles County board of supervisors said it planned to join an effort to petition the supreme court to review a decision that restricts efforts to prevent homeless people from sleeping rough in western states.
“The status quo is untenable,” said county supervisor Mark Ridley-Thomas. “We need to call this what it is: a state of emergency.”