The environmental regulator in Western Australia says that emissions from a fertiliser plant on the Burrup Peninsula are “manageable” and not damaging the 
The Environmental Protection Agency said there was no “definitive information” on the impact of cumulative industrial emissions from the Yara Pilbara Nitrates plant – which is 1km from one of the best-known rock art sites on the peninsula – on the condition of the art.
It found the plant “already uses best practice pollution control technology” and recommended a minor change to its licence to require that it work to progressively minimise the emission of harmful chemicals and continue to adopt advances in air pollution control technology.
Murujuga is home to more than one million petroglyphs carved into the loose red rocks piled up around the Burrup Peninsula and surrounding islands of the Dampier archipelago, some of which are estimated to be 60,000 years old. The engravings include depictions of extinct megafauna as well as sacred figures.
The Western Australian government 
“Definitive information on whether cumulative industrial air emissions, including those from the TANPF, are adversely affecting rock art is currently not available,” a 
“In the absence of conclusive information from the Murujuga Rock Art Monitoring Program, the EPA considers that the best practice stack emission concentration limits … are an effective means of minimising the risk of air emissions from [the plant] impacting on rock art.”
A Senate inquiry 
The WA government has questioned the methodology of research cited in that report.
The EPA said the monitoring program and proposed air quality monitoring network would be the “most appropriate” mechanism for monitoring air pollution in the area, once established.
“This would ensure that the responsibility for such monitoring is shared amongst all existing and future industrial emitters in an equitable manner,” the report said.
It said it expected that industries contributing to that pollution would also contribute funds to establish the proposed monitoring network.
The EPA is currently conducting an own-motion inquiry into cumulative industrial emissions on the peninsula.
The environment minister, Stephen Dawson, said his department was “procuring the services of a suitably qualified and experienced specialist service provider” to develop and implement the monitoring program. He said he would consider the EPA’s report.
“We will continue to work with the Murujuga Rock Art Stakeholder Reference Group to deliver a scientifically rigorous approach to monitoring and the management of this unique rock art,” he said.
Two new chemical plants