he second month of the year begins with 
Mostly invisible, this silent killer causes an estimated 
The capital may be worst, but around the country filthy air pollutes the lungs in many cities. Check this pollution map to 
As with most of the gravest problems facing Britain, the solutions are relatively easy to find: the problem, as ever, in this fractured and fractious country, is summoning up the collective political will to take action. It turns out privatisation of national utilities is a significant cause of air pollution in a number of ways.
Take the explosion of van deliveries as the Amazon I–want-it-now impulse is followed by every company that wants to stay in business. Be it Argos or John Lewis, everyone delivers it to your doorstep fast, multiple vans criss-crossing each other and knocking on the same doors over and over. Van traffic has grown 
Why? Royal Mail visits every household once a day, these days delivering mostly junk mail at ever-rising stamp prices for lack of volume business. As predicted, private companies cherrypick easy deliveries, leaving Royal Mail to take single letters to every remote farm.
If Labour is going to renationalise it, the party should consider giving Royal Mail back its delivery monopoly, either by law or by incentive, with punitive levies on needless extra deliveries, making the last mile to front doors a presumed Royal Mail function for most parcels.
Consolidating collection points for parcels at railway stations needs an extra boost: the one at Victoria has a changing room so you can send back unwanted clothes there and then. But escalating door-to-door delivery is yet another example of the destructiveness of bringing competition into a national utility. That was done in the name of choice, price-cutting, investment and efficiency – but wrecking Royal Mail has helped cause traffic congestion and air pollution that no one chose.
Look how bringing pointless competition to utilities has caused an explosion of roadworks with all its extra trucks, as competing companies dig up miles of roads and slow the traffic, which idles at blockages. Although better public transport, congestion charging and congestion itself have cut car-use dramatically in London, 
At privatisation, utilities were given a statutory freedom to dig up roads, with little regulation. Under Tottenham Court Road, for example, 80 different utility companies have their lines and pipes, digging up more or less at will. They refuse to share space or facilities with competitors.
Bus deregulation has also been a disaster. Outside 
After 
By tomorrow the UK government and other countries 
 Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist
 This article was amended on 2 February 2018 to remove a section that referred to 250 buses an hour on Oxford Street and incorrectly blamed this on deregulation/competition.