Your article (
While it is easy for wealthy countries who have benefited from concrete to now condemn it, concrete remains a vital means of social and economic transformation for developing nations. To limit the development of these nations is unethical. The key is to ensure that this development is sustainable. Fortunately, when considering its long-term and systematic impact, concrete becomes a sustainable solution. Concrete buildings are highly energy efficient, which reduces their lifetime emissions, while concrete roads generate fewer vehicle emissions. Concrete also endures extreme hazard events, and its use mitigates millions of dollars in damage each year. An effective response to climate change will therefore require concrete.
Despite criticism, concrete is still crucial to our civilisation. Instead of abandoning the most important construction material in human history, we ought to expand our understanding of it and utilise its full potential to enable sustainable development.
 Peter Anderson says that CO
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change special report entitled 
 Your articles paint concrete as the principal cause of overcrowding in cities, the genesis of brutalist buildings, the most prolific user of industrial water, a major contributor to respiratory diseases, and being the most abundant material choking our landfills. Yet sprinkled throughout the litany of concrete’s many failings are concessions to why it is the most abundantly used material in the world, second only to water, and how it has shaped every aspect of our lives. This is because it is readily available, infinitely malleable, strong and durable, and is the enabler of structures and related infrastructure that have improved the quality of life for countless millions. In short, concrete is the foundation of modern civilisation and the building block for human progress. But at least recent articles have got us talking about what is right and what is wrong about concrete. Now we can move forward and deal with both sides of the equation.
 Peter Anderson fails to mention that the 300kg of CO
 Is this now time for lime mortar, which emits around 95% less CO
 Concrete week in the Guardian, and as yet no mention of Tom Hardy or the film Locke. Shame on you.