t least two decades after cotton buds (known in my childhood home as “ear cleaners”) became well known as a public health hazard, never, ever to be placed anywhere near ears, the government has announced plans to ban them, 
That doesn’t mean it isn’t good news: because they are small, hard and pointy these nasty pieces of plastic are dangerous for marine creatures, who sometimes eat them, and the sooner we get rid of them the better. The same goes for coffee stirrers and plastic straws, 
 of albatross nests full of trash may have been (literally) the last plastic straw for my family, but in any case paper ones work fine (although someone may need to invent one sharp enough to pierce the foil-covered straw-hole in juice cartons). However, if Michael Gove’s crackdown on not-very-useful single-use plastic items doesn’t go far enough, what are the items that any plastic-restricting environment secretary should seek to ban?
We know the basics: tins, glass and paper yes; plastic film no. But what about those trays that fish comes in, with no information on them? Manufacturers and retailers should be forced to label every piece of packaging, including lids and fastenings – so we know what to do with them. No more hovering around bins, tormented by the fear of contamination.
We use more than a 
More ubiquitous than ever, as salads and other non-hand-held lunch options proliferate, these are so obviously dreadful – never more so than when they come in plastic packets with knives and napkins no one needs – that they must be stopped. Biodegradable alternatives only, or cleverly designed portable, reusable ones. (These exist but mainly in camping shops – we need them on display at checkouts across the land.)
The government has announced a 
One day I will do an experiment and watch public recycling bins get emptied and sorted. My hunch is that contamination is virtually universal, and these bins don’t work. Some people can’t be bothered to sort their litter, but it’s not all our fault. Standing there with a plastic spoon, a coffee cup with plastic lid, a greasy sandwich packet with a film lid, a napkin and a plastic pot – with no tap to rinse off any food residue – it’s not obvious what to do. Suggestion: taps (see above) located so that they could also be used for rinsing.
This is tricky, because a healthy waste market ought to mean plenty of competition, with the councils who buy these services able to shop around. But for ordinary people it’s confusing, as some authorities collect mixed recycling while others demand stringent sorting; and what is deemed recyclable varies too. For people who live and work in different local authority areas (extremely common in and around London), it’s hard to keep track. We need homogenisation.
Reusable and biodegradable alternatives only (see cutlery, above).
Some people think recycling is a displacement activity for people who can’t really bear to shrink their carbon footprints. But while fussing over plastic forks in an airport lounge before boarding a long-haul flight might not be strictly rational, I disagree. Plastics are made from 
 Susanna Rustin is a Guardian writer and editor