A giant floating barrier launched off the coast of San Francisco as part of a $20m project to cleanup a 
The mastermind behind 
Inventor Boyan Slat, 24, said that the slow speed of the solar-powered 600m-long barrier means it is unable to hold on to plastics, but a team of experts is now working on a possible fix.
“What we’re trying to do has never been done before. So, of course we were expecting to still need to fix a few things before it becomes fully operational,” Slat explained.
The marine apparatus known as System 001, or ‘Wilson’, 
First plastic 
Slat posted images on social media of the first contact the barrier had with plastic waste after becoming operational in October.
But in an update this week the team said the challenge of the device not retaining plastic had not been predicted from scale models and prototypes.
A 
A crew will now perform new tests and collect additional data to explore the root cause of the issue.
Challenges mount as 24-year-old 
A status update on the Ocean Cleanup website explained potential causes to the glitch. It said: “Wilson might be having greater impact on the currents carrying the plastics than initially predicted.
“It looks as though various current effects are resulting from the system’s behaviour in the water. For instance there has been observed a stagnation effect where small patches of plastic are driven around Wilson and accumulate on the exterior of system.”
The plastic barrier with a tapered three-meter-deep ‘skirt’ is intended to act like a coastline, trapping some of the 1.8tn pieces of plastic that scientists estimate are swirling in the patch, while allowing marine life to safely swim beneath it.
On transit to the cleanup system a 3rd ghost net was recovered yesterday. These things are huge. 
Researchers claim the project could remove 50% of plastics in the area within five years but 
Miriam Goldstein, the director of ocean policy at the 
“Their environmental impact assessment did not seriously address the effects of these large-scale structures on endangered animals such as sea turtles, on commercially important fish such as tuna, or on the animals that live by floating on the sea surface.”
Goldstein added: “They have also never addressed how they will deal with fouling, which is when animals such as barnacles grow directly on the device, adding a huge amount of weight and drag. A solution is not a solution if it does more environmental harm than good.”
Others claim efforts would be better focused on the root cause of plastic waste.
George Leonard, chief scientist of the 
Slat agreed that preventing more plastic from entering the ocean is part of the solution but said something needs to be done about what’s already there.