hat is the best way of wrecking a city? Pour cars into it. Heavy traffic, 
The fashion for SUVs is one of the two main reasons for rising road deaths among pedestrians
Street life is treated as an impediment to traffic. In cities all over the world it has been cleared for cars. Stalls, hawkers, football and cricket games, old people playing dominoes, chess or pétanque: all must make way for the car. So much land is required for driving and parking that there is little left for human life. In cities like Barcelona that curb traffic, cars use about 25% of the urban area. In cities like Houston that don’t, 
Land Rover’s new advertisements for its 
One of the ads 
She also drives down Brixton Road, 
Air pollution is now believed to 
SUVs are killing machines: because they are higher and heavier, you are more likely to die if you are hit by one than if you are struck by an ordinary car. The fashion for SUVs is 
Another of the ads urges drivers to “
These ads are horribly reminiscent of the commercial Jeep tours through Rio’s favelas. Residents say the tours make them feel 
They also remind me of Volkswagen’s 
These ads help to normalise antisocial – even pathological – behaviour. Just as we need to radically reduce the use of cars, for the sake of both human health and planetary survival (the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, has just announced a 
In his book Unlocking Sustainable Cities, 
Neither electric cars nor driverless cars will solve our problems. They take up as much space as fossil-powered vehicles. Electric cars are already triggering a 
It makes far more sense to build electrified mass transit. But those whose profits depend on urban carmageddon go to great lengths to thwart it. In the United States, Americans for Prosperity, a group founded and funded by the 
Another planned advertisement for the Evoque, this time in Chicago, crudely defines the conflict. In 
In A Tale of Two Cities, Charles Dickens wrote of “the fierce patrician custom of hard driving”. As aristocrats raced heedlessly through the streets of Paris in their carriages, everyone else had to jump out of the way or perish. Dickens hinted that this barbaric practice was among the many atrocities that helped catalyse the French Revolution. Today, as cars clear a path through our lives, we need a new revolt against hard driving. It is time to reclaim the streets for the people.
 George Monbiot is a Guardian columnist