“E-bikes are fantastic. I use them all the time. You can take the kids up mountains. You can arrive in your good clothes at a meeting. It’s so easy.” Who said this? 
Surprisingly, it was none other than 
Commuting is changing in UK cities, partly because there is little choice. Congestion, dangerous levels of 
But 
What were my objectives? To put myself in the shoes, and indeed the seat, of a non-cyclist, and to be able to move quickly and comfortably without breaking sweat. I opted for 
 
BMW has been designing e-bikes for decades, but the fact that a leading carmaker is increasingly investing in this type of transport points to change that is already evident in the EU. The e-bike market is much more mature across Europe, particularly in the Netherlands, where 
But what about the power? As a pedelec this only kicks while you’re pedalling, otherwise it would be classed as an electric moped. On the flat I find it peculiar at first, and instinctively try to go faster than the 25kmh (15.5mph) legal limiter. But the bike is all about gliding along, and I try the three throttle positions, including the top 250W setting. Zooming up a steep, cobbled hill in Munich’s Olympic Park, I’m amazed at the momentum. Riding really is effortless and as I continue around the city, I begin to see the appeal. The bike is completely silent and the battery can last up to 100km (62 miles). 
The saddle, which is designed to provide additional stability for the increased acceleration power compared to regular bikes, is not cheap at €89.90 (£79.50), but is comfortable and made with non-slip material and gel filling to reduce pressure. I could imagine it being used on other urban models or even mountain bikes. 
I can’t see myself converting to an electric model at this stage, but if I was new to biking, lived much further from work, or was older, I’d be very tempted. Even on a cold winter commute it would be far preferable to interminable crowds and queues. At €3,400 (£3,000) the Active Hybrid is expensive, but would 
 What are your experiences and thoughts about e-biking? Let us know in the comments below