hat will the rocks record about the lives we lead? What might a future palaeontologist, human or otherwise, make of the structures that will come to signify these moments in which you and I live our lives? They will notice extinctions, of course. Fossils of mammals’ tusks and horns will abound in the rocks, only to disappear when we humans turn up. They will come across our mines – enormous trace fossils, perhaps the largest ever to have existed. They will see, by studying fossil pollen, that the climate changed. They will find our discarded KFC bones and they will wonder how the world supported so many chickens. And there, among it all, they will probably find that most awful of human inventions: glitter. Oodles of it – purples, pinks and reds – crushed into rocks the world over. Mineralised madness. Our lowest ebb. What will those future palaeontologists make of it? What will glitter say about us?
Perhaps this is our mark in the geological strata. A post-glitter epoch that all started with a handful of nurseries
I am reaching a point in my life when I am discovering the true awfulness of glitter. Having two small children will do that for you. Barely a day goes by when I am not picking the stuff out of my hair, my bellybutton or, inexplicably, my ear canals. It is stuck in the cracks between our floorboards. It is stuck in our carpets. There is a faint residue of it in our car from a spillage two years ago. It is in our children’s book bags, their beds. They love how it sparkles, but for me it’s become a charmless wretch of a product and we need to be done with it.
Thankfully, I’m not alone. The tide is, I hope, turning against glitter.
A group of nurseries looking after 2,500 children in southern England has just banned the use of glitter in their craft activities. With Christmas coming, 
Glitter is often made of plastic and aluminium, bonded with polyethylene terephthalate in tiny structures that scientists call microplastics. It’s capable of being blown vast distances and the sea, being so massive, is often its inevitable destination. 
Not everyone will support the so-called glitter ban, of course. “It’s health and safety gone mad!” some will inevitably say. “Let kids be kids!” they will mutter. I agree, mostly, but I’m almost certain that a child’s love and appreciation of crafting will not be shot to pieces because of the absence of a substance that reflects the ceiling light in a few different directions, instilling a feeling of momentary half-amazement before the vacuum cleaner has to come out. There are alternatives – 
So I applaud this decision, and I applaud others who are finally turning their back on this pernicious, devilish dandruff. I dream of a world where craft sessions will no more finish in human tears. No more will I have to pick it out of my teeth or from between my fingers. No more shall I be fishing it out of our plughole or, more bluntly, my various body holes. No more. No more. This is an intervention. All that glitters is not gold.
Perhaps this is our line in the sand. Our mark in the geological strata. A brave first step into a post-glitter epoch, and it all started with a handful of children’s nurseries. A world in which glitter has finally lost its shine. May we find new ways, as a species, to sparkle.
 Jules Howard is a zoologist and the author of Sex on Earth and Death on Earth