ast week, a whistle rang out in a buzzing conference fairground on the edge of Madrid. Instantly, a swell of protesters rose up, determined to “bring in the streets and tear down the walls”, enraged that the 
The 
The world of COP is divided on economic and geographic faultlines. On one side is the global south, which lacks the resources to pick itself up after every new disaster brought on by the climate crisis; at the same time, dissent there is violently quelled. On the other lie northern countries such as the UK, which announced “
This COP pointed to deepening fissures in old blocs, as real-time climate risks widened the rift. Small island nations with the most to lose voiced opposition to countries such as India, Brazil and China being in favour of 
To achieve the 1.5C limit, countries have to increase their commitments five-fold, starting in 2020, said a new 
At 
Through the night of last-ditch negotiations, I wandered the halls of this after-dark world, surveying the snacks that non-profits had stockpiled to see them through. Broken activists and diplomats curled up on recycled-wood armchairs and fuzzy rugs at the Ikea-sponsored UN pavilion for the night. I took pictures with the neon Gandhi in India’s massive greenwashing pavilion to send to environmentalists back home. Does the world still need COPs or could they be replaced by an intergovernmental Slack chat?
COP25 should have been about welcoming new science, clearing unfinished business on climate finance, and raising trust and ambition. While there were wins on gender, agriculture and capacity building, this became a carryover COP, with decisions around carbon markets unclear, leaving old hostilities and glaring loopholes to sort through next year, an outcome even Patricia Espinosa, executive secretary of UN Climate Change, 
We’re now just days away from 2020, when all countries must sit together to communicate and review all that they’ve done so far and all they can do under their commitments to the Paris agreement. This offers countries a last chance to “update” their national climate pledges to “reflect [each country’s] highest possible ambition” before 2025, a time by which we would have blown through more of our carbon budget. What happens at COP26 in Glasgow next year will determine if nations have a reason to stay in the Paris deal at all.
But dysfunctional as they are, COPs are perhaps the only international legal forum that are partly open to observers to witness geopolitics and global call-out culture first-hand. And it’s those witnesses – all of us – who must apply the pressure.
The 
 Aruna Chandrasekhar is a journalist from India. She is currently based at the University of Oxford’s Environmental Change Institute