From next year, 
As the name suggests, this is a type of fuel – usually in the form of undried fuel logs – with a moisture content of at least 20% that is burned in stoves and fireplaces. Also known as green or unseasoned wood, it is cheap and widely available in DIY or garden centres, where it is usually sold in sacks or nets. An estimated 2.5m homes in the UK rely on this or coal for heating.
The moisture in the wood is a vector for pollutants that can cause breathing problems, 
Action is long overdue. Even in London, which has had smoke control areas for more than 60 years, wood burning accounts for up to 31% of PM2.5, according to a study by King’s College. 
Not yet. The restrictions are limited and will be phased in over several years. Even after they come into full effect, fire lovers will still be able to collect their own kindling and branches and buy seasoned or kiln-dried logs (as long as they have moisture levels below 20%). This fuel is more expensive, but burns more efficiently and more cleanly, which means more heat, lower flue maintenance costs and fewer health concerns. It is also easier to light and produces a satisfying crackle rather than a sputtering hiss.
Yes. This change means some people may have to pay more to heat their homes. Worst affected are likely to be former coalmining communities where sales of relatively cheap local supplies will be prohibited, and low-income residents in the countryside. Even before the ban comes into effect, rural dwellers are already 55% more likely to suffer fuel poverty. The government 
These measures will help, but they should only be a start. The block on sales of coal and wet wood will reduce one major source of harmful air pollution, but there are others including cars, trucks, manufacturing and construction. Tighter controls on vehicle and factory emissions will be necessary if the government is serious about reducing cases of childhood asthma and the sometimes fatal long-term heart and lung problems related to PM2.5. A 
Very little, at least in the short term when people are likely to switch to dry wood or manufactured smokeless fuels. Looking further ahead, the extra cost of that fuel might encourage more house owners to consider making their homes more energy efficient, which would be help to reduce emissions. UK buildings have one of the 
Switching to lower-carbon or renewable energy, such as ground-source heat pumps, would make an even bigger difference, but this would require infrastructure investment and incentives from the government to make the alternatives affordable and widely available. If the UK wants to have a double-win on air pollution and climate, another option would be action on transport, including tighter controls on car emissions, more investment in public transit, greater support for electric vehicles and a levy on aviation fuel (which is currently tax-free). Compared with that, the restrictions on domestic coal use and wet wood are a drop in the ocean.
 This article was amended on 24 February 2020. An earlier version incorrectly referred to the ban on burning coal and wet wood applying to the whole of the UK. It applies to England only.