he prime minister has 
Those shop workers could well be among the first to handle a new kind of plastics-free packaging that the world so badly needs. While the war may last well beyond next Christmas, Iceland has pledged 
A truckload of plastic waste enters our oceans every minute, much of it packaging, and it poses a threat to everything from the smallest plankton to the biggest whale. It breaks down into microplastics, which like a billion tiny sponges collect any toxic chemicals they encounter, concentrating these as they pass up 
If we set 2043 as a deadline for solving this grievous problem, then it will, of course, be far too late for many species – and probably for entire ecosystems. A supermarket seems to have a grasp of the response this threat demands, and it is against these new commitments – and not the government’s ambition – that other retailers will be measured.
Of course, I’m aware Iceland’s plan is a relatively small response to an overwhelmingly huge problem, applying only to 1,000 or so own-brand products. Some of its plastic packaging may turn out to be very tricky to replace. But the implications are massive. The move strikes the vital note that such problems are solved by taking action, not by waiting until someone else does or the government forces you to. The more supermarkets that follow this bold move, the more research will be done into alternatives, and the more pressure will be put on the big plastic-wrapped brands to follow their lead.
The public, media and politics are aligned – we’re not going to get a better chance to confront this issue
And now, not tomorrow, is the time to do so. UK supermarkets generate 
I’ve been banging on about one particularly pernicious product for years: the ubiquitous plastic-lined, recyclable-so-long-as-you-can-afford-to- get-Nasa-to-do-it-for-you 
It has been heartening to see the issue of such badly designed packaging climbing up the agenda, but so little of that noise has transferred to action. Westminster’s 
David Attenborough’s stunning 
And yet most supermarkets are still keeping their heads down and hoping the plastic storm blows over while bringing out pre-chopped onions and “
Retired retail moguls wrote to the Financial Times last month to say that 
 Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall is a food and cookery writer, broadcaster and campaigner