arely a week after positioning himself as the new champion of Florida’s polluted waterways and beaches, the new Republican governor, Ron DeSantis, is facing an early test of the environmental credentials that have put him at odds with his predecessor, Rick Scott.
DeSantis has called for the mass resignation of Scott’s hand-picked team of water policy managers, after they defied his request to delay awarding an eight-year land lease extension to the sugar industry giant Florida Crystals in the fragile Everglades wetlands. The land, south of Lake Okeechobee, is earmarked for a $1.6bn 
But several of the directors of the South Florida water management district, which is responsible for water quality from Orlando to the Florida Keys, are continuing to refuse 
The 
While red tide is a naturally occurring bacterial phenomenon, environmentalists say the outbreak was made far worse by fertilisers and other poisonous agricultural run-off from farming and sugar industries.
“Our water and natural resources are the foundation of our economy and our way of life in 
He also said red tide had “devastated our local economies and threatened the health of our communities”.
The spat also highlights substantial policy differences with Scott that have led to DeSantis being cast as “
DeSantis refused money from so-called big sugar and promised to reduce the industry’s influence on Florida politics and the amount of pollutants it pumps into waterways in the the form of agricultural run-off contaminated by phosphorus and nitrogen.
DeSantis was the surprise winner of last summer’s primary against the agricultural commissioner, Adam Putnam, who 
The DeSantis agenda also creates a taskforce to look into solutions for red tide and 
DeSantis said during the campaign he 
To advocates weary of what they saw as Scott’s “election-year environmentalism”, DeSantis offers a welcome change of direction.
“To come out less than 48 hours after taking office with a bold executive order full of about a dozen items, I’d say he is as serious as a heart attack,” said Eric Eikenberg, the chief executive of the Everglades Foundation.
“It’s a new day to have a Republican governor, or any governor, saying he specifically wants a chief science officer, and an office of resiliency is a clear indication this governor wants to tackle the difficult issues.”
Eikenberg also stressed the importance of the storage reservoir at the centre of DeSantis’s tussle with the outgoing administration, a $1.6bn project designed by the US army corps of engineers and jointly funded by the state and Congress.
In October, 
But the board caused outrage in November when it approved a hasty motion to award Florida Crystals an eight-year extension to its existing lease on a 16,500-acre parcel within the land upon which the reservoir is set to be built. Eikenberg said the vote was illegal under Florida law because public notice was not given until 9pm the night before.
“It was a big double cross,” he said. “For weeks Scott’s water management district was talking about a need to be aggressive and demonstrate a sense of urgency, then two days after DeSantis was elected they pulled the rug from millions of Floridians who want to see this reservoir built. And they did it to the benefit of big sugar.
“What DeSantis has said is he wants a new start and an agency that’s going to be focused on natural resources, the Everglades and cleaning up the algae, not an agency working for the special interests of the sugar industry.”
The agency sees things differently. A spokesman referred the Guardian to an 8 November 
Of the nine board members, one resigned in January for unrelated reasons and two, Dan O’Keefe and Carlos Diaz, agreed to DeSantis’s request to stand down. But four others refused to resign, 
“The arrogance displayed over the past 24 hours by the board is indicative of how they have operated for the better part of a decade – without transparency and with disdain,” said Brian Mast, a US congressman and a DeSantis ally and environmental policy adviser, in a statement.
“They have failed to exercise even the most basic, legally required level of transparency and therefore should be removed for cause.”
Florida Crystals, whose subsidiary the New Hope