At the end of a week in which the Trump administration 
“What I will tell you is that we will always follow the science on that in this administration,” the vice-president said, in answer to CNN State of the Union host Jake Tapper’s 
Tapper responded: “The science says it is.”
Pence said: “But what we won’t do, and the Clean Power Plan was all about that, was hamstringing energy in this country, raising the cost of utility rates for working families across this country.”
Tapper interjected: “But is it a threat?”
Pence did not answer the interjection, complaining instead that “other nations like China and India absolutely do nothing or make illusory promises decades down the road”. He also praised US focus on natural gas and “
Tapper persevered: “But is what people are calling a climate emergency, is it a threat? Do you think it is a threat, manmade climate emergency is a threat?”
Pence said: “I think the answer to [that] is going to be based upon the science.”
Tapper insisted “the science says yes” and told the vice-president “the science community in your own administration, at [the 
“Look,” said Pence. “What the president has said, what we have said is that we’re not going to raise utility rates.”
Tapper persisted: “But is it not a threat?”
Pence criticised 
He also took aim at the 
Tapper tried once more: “OK. So you don’t think it is a threat, is all I’m saying? You don’t think it is a threat?”
Pence said: “I think we’re making great progress reducing carbon emissions. America has the cleanest air and water in the world...”
Tapper interrupted, laughing: “That is not true. We don’t have the cleanest air and water in the world. We don’t.”
Pence said: “OK.”
Tapper asked him to “get back to me with some statistics that show it”.
Pence could have reached for the 
Pence insisted the 
“The answer, though, is not to raise the utility rates of millions of utility rate payers across the country.”
Tapper finally gave up, and asked about Russian election interference instead.