PFAS, short for perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances, are a group of 
 are PFOA (also known as C8) – used for decades to make 
 PFAS are highly persistent and accumulate over time in humans, animals and the environment.
, stain and water repellents, some furniture, waterproof clothes, pizza boxes and take-out containers, food packaging, carpets and textiles, rubbers and plastics, electronics and some 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) found PFOA in in the blood of 98% of Americans, as well as in breast milk and umbilical cord blood.
 of about 
Health effects of the various kinds of PFAS 
, cancer, liver damage, immune system disruption, resistance to vaccines, thyroid disease, impaired fertility and high cholesterol. PFAS have been dubbed “possibly carcinogenic” to humans by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the International Agency for Cancer Research (IARC).
as part of a legal settlement with residents living near one of its Teflon facilities found that PFOA was probably linked to six disease 
 on both humans and animals have shown a wide range of possible 
, eating food packaged in certain materials, or using products embedded with PFAS.
 Gore-Tex fabric and clothing made with pre-2000 Scotchguard, and personal care products containing PTFE or flouro ingredients. When in doubt, ask manufacturers if their products contain PFAS since they may not be labeled.
if your water is contaminated above EPA-specified levels, and stop using it if so.
 and don’t eat contaminated catches.
The federal government does not regulate PFAS.
 the EPA announced in February it would begin the process of regulating PFOA and PFAS in the next two years (these regulations, if issued, would not apply to other PFAS chemicals).
 are pushing their own regulations and bans.
 of use in the US under a 2006 voluntary agreement brokered by the EPA with eight major companies, including DuPont. However, these substances are still circulating in the country via imports. Research on the chemicals used to replace PFOA – including GenX, which is produced by DuPont spinoff Chemours – is limited. A 2018 draft assessment by the 
, where PFAS use and manufacture is much lower than the US, PFOS is regulated as a persistent organic pollutant, and more regulations are expected to kick in next year.
and prohibited its use and import.