here is nothing like the image of deformed sperm to grab the attention of male politicians. The tentative 
When I was first elected to the London Assembly 17 years ago, we were told that air pollution was yesterday’s issue and the technological solutions were rolling off the production line. I wasn’t convinced and argued that we needed to change our lifestyles by driving less, but very few in the media, or politics, saw this as a priority. That changed as the medical evidence mounted and the technological fix failed to deliver. The 
The chancellor’s budget has finally seen us start on the path to 
As an ex-archaeologist, I am well aware of the link between environmental degradation and the collapse of civilisations. For example, one early theory linked the decline of the Roman Empire with its increasing use of lead pipes. A technology that benefited millions of city dwellers also brought them damage to the brain and nervous system, the stomach and the kidneys. Lead pipes can also cause high blood pressure and other health problems. Sound familiar?
According to scientists at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, sperm counts among men in the west have 
Driving has become an essential human right, like shopping on Black Friday and perfectly shaped vegetables at Christmas. These are apparent signs of progress and civilisation, the fruits of consumer technology designed to make us happy. It is hard to argue otherwise in polite society and as 
This consumerism is also fuelling our experiment with climate change, which is a huge gamble with the realities of living on a planet with finite resources. Climate change may seem an abstract idea, far less real than a coughing fit on a polluted London road, but its impacts on our economy and way of life could be as devastating as the impact of a volcanic eruption on the Minoan civilisation – it didn’t end well.
So let’s not sigh over disturbing episodes of Blue Planet 2 but do nothing to change our lifestyles. Let’s not consume the news of hurricane devastation with popcorn and fizzy drinks on the side. Humanity must accept that our future wellbeing is irrevocably linked to the planet’s health and perhaps deformed sperm will be the tipping point.
 Jenny Jones is a former chair of the Green party