e are what we eat, and what we eat reveals something about what we are in return. So it shouldn’t be all that surprising that humans are now apparently eating plastic, given what we mostly are is thoughtless enough to have littered the planet with the stuff.
A 
With apologies to 
Does it actually matter? This study can’t yet answer that question, because all it tells us is that microplastics were found in human faeces. If it’s just passing through like an unwelcome guest before being summarily expelled from the body, then perhaps there’s no damage done. If there were evidence of plastics being absorbed through the gut barrier and accumulating in our internal organs, as some animal studies have suggested they seem to be doing, that would potentially be a red flag. But either way, the instinctive yuck factor of finding something inside ourselves that we wouldn’t have actively chosen to put there ought to put rocket boosters under efforts to tackle plastic pollution.
Michael Gove, the environment secretary, is currently consulting on plans to 
The commitment to use 
Solving plastic pollution is, it should be said, nowhere near as simple as some campaigners make it sound. Switching away from plastic packaging to other materials would trigger other environmental quandaries, for a start. Bottling liquids in glass rather than plastic makes them heavier, which potentially means more trips to transport them; paper production has a bigger carbon footprint than its plastic equivalent. There’s a reason, in short, we got so reliant on plastic in the first place, and even if it were possible to phase the stuff out tomorrow, it would take up to 1,000 years for some of what’s being produced right now to biodegrade.
But just because it’s difficult, doesn’t mean we shrug our shoulders and do nothing, and perhaps this is the wake-up call some needed. There is something genuinely mad about a society that is on the one hand obsessed with the quality of the food we put in our mouths, and yet also blithely eats its own garbage. The war on plastic, it seems, just got personal.
 Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist