For the 
The North Carolina-based activist, 
The sprawling, $9.4bn site in the parish’s fifth ward, pushed by the Taiwanese petrochemicals giant Formosa, would consist of 14 separate plants across 2,300 acres of land and, if approved, would be allowed to roughly double the amount of toxic emissions in the parish from 1.6m lb to 3.2m.
The proposed construction, known as the Sunshine Project, has won the support of local and state officials, 
On Wednesday evening Barber argued the project was backed by “evil economics”.
“It comes down to greed,” Barber said. “You could take an area like Cancer Alley and focus on things that would fix the environment and put people to work cleaning up the mess. But it’s almost as if people decide ‘we just want money’. And then they decide who can we make the money off of that will give us the least resistance. It’s evil economics.”
Formosa did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Activists from St John & St James parish, along with 
Barber last visited the region in July as part of a series of Guardian co-sponsored town hall events in New Orleans and Reserve, which is the focus of a year-long series, 
The primary cause of this elevated risk is emissions from a synthetic rubber plant, the Pontchartrain Works facility, operated by the Japanese chemicals giant Denka. The plant is the only place in America to emit the compound chloroprene, listed by the EPA as a “likely carcinogen”.
Earlier in the month Democratic presidential candidate Elizabeth Warren 
On Wednesday, Barber said he had been in contact with a number of the leading Democratic candidates, including 
Barber briefly broke off from an interview with the Guardian to call Warren’s personal cellphone, leaving a voicemail: “We really need to bring the campaign through Cancer Alley. We need to bring worldwide and national attention to what’s going on here. And how it is the direct relationship between policy and justice, racism and economic greed,” he said. 
“If I die, I’m going to die standing. If I die, I’m going to die speaking the truth.” 
The march on Wednesday was 
Numbers have ebbed and flowed over the days of activism as organizers hope for a large turnout at the governor’s mansion in Baton Rouge next Wednesday. Barber will return to the city for that march.
“If you go into these parishes where [the petrochemical industry] already exists, people understand there is a problem, so I think we have public opinion on our side,” said Anne Rolfes, executive director of the 
“The gap that we have is people believing they can do something about it and I think that part of this is building excitement, building camaraderie, and then really looking at our strategies and our tactical plans for succeeding,” she said.
Barber said his continued visits to the region were having a profound effect on his campaigning.
“When I hear the deep faith of the people here. When I see people like