ur old car has probably taken its last trip into central London. I haven’t driven it into the middle of town for two years, and that was before this week’s introduction of a 
I wish I could say the same for my wood stove, which is brand new. By the time I realised the mayor of London was also considering 
I’ll admit the sudden shift in the wood stove’s fortunes – from fashionable, even vaguely environmental accessory, to middle-class pollution engine – surprised me. If I’d known a year ago that wood-burning accounted for a quarter of particle pollution in 
Why did I buy it? To be honest, it’s because there was already a pipe sticking out of the chimney when we moved in this summer. There was a gap that needed filling. Let’s get a wood stove, I said. Everybody likes wood stoves!
It’s not done any harm so far, except to my self-regard. I don’t actually own any wood yet. I’ll cross that bridge when it gets colder. And I look forward to the day when my enjoyment of it is appropriately disincentivised.
To hear the 
Heaton-Harris wrote to university vice-chancellors requesting the names of any professors teaching European affairs – specifically Brexit – and links to their online lectures. His intention, neither plainly stated nor sufficiently obscured, makes the tone of the letters chilling: he’s clearly on the hunt for perceived anti-Brexit teaching, which can be dressed up as bias, if not disloyalty.
The demand for “naming names” has an obvious echo with Senator Joseph McCarthy’s self-serving witch-hunts, but in America his name is so associated with rabid anti-communism that it’s rarely invoked for similar tactics in other spheres. When you hear it these days, the term “new McCarthyism” is usually being levelled at the US government by pro-Russian media or anybody wanting to play down Russian inference in the American elections. In other words, if it’s used at all, it’s misused. Nice to see it being applied so judiciously here.
“You’ll be very interested in what’s happening outside!” my wife shouts up the stairs. As a freelance writer, my innate nosiness is compromised by having to spend all day behind a desk in my house. A local incident is a gift.
I was interested: road blocked, area sealed off, cops with dogs everywhere. This can’t be about the wood stove, I thought. Not this soon.
I strolled past, slowly; nothing happened. When I got to corner I felt that any continued gawping ought to be cloaked in purpose. I decided to go to the end of the road to get some bread. When I returned, the helicopter, and the cops and their dogs, were gone. What kind of incident could be that significant, only to evaporate in the time it took to buy bread? I’ll never know.
 Tim Dowling is a Guardian columnist