ities are getting louder, and we’re finding it harder to cope with the din, 
Many of you 
Noise pollution is the absolute scourge of our time. It seems that no space is free from vehicles, phone calls, music or yelling. I grew up in a block of flats where the downstairs neighbour would play music all night long while drunk. The floor used to shake. My partner calls me a Victor Meldrew about noise but it really is hell. The last place I lived I had to wear earplugs to sleep every night. And that was a flat in a well-to-do area that just happened to be on a main road. I remember asking the estate agent during the viewing and he just looked out of the window as if to say “look at this place – you think it’s noisy?” only for it to turn into Las Vegas every Friday and Saturday. I now live somewhere much quieter. But my sympathy is with anyone who suffers. 
Two of the worst offenders: ambulance sirens are unnecessarily and aggressively loud (above the pain threshold) and high performance motorbikes also one of the worst noise pollutants. 
It’s a shame governments finally pay some attention to insulation to save energy, but very little is done for air quality and sound insulation, even in new homes. When I was in the market for a new apartment, I asked a lot of companies who were building brand new building blocks or houses if they would install a ventilation system and with what filters and if there was any sound insulation between apartments (which is different from heat insulation). Not only didn’t any of them have any plans to do so, they genuinely didn’t know what I was talking about. A shame, because noise and air pollution are two big reasons people decide to live in suburbia instead of the city, creating more pollution commuting and heating bigger houses. 
Here in Malmö the worst thing is the police helicopter. It’s up there for hours and hours on end, even for the most innocuous football fixture. 
Excessive noise isn’t compulsory and unavoidable but if we don’t have noise limits then we can’t complain. If we do have noise limits on vehicles, especially scooters and motorbikes, commercial premises, construction noise and neighbours then they should be enforced. It’s the same with air pollution – that’s killing people too but it seems it’s too difficult to deal with. 
Having lived in London for all my adult life, having the sounds of the city and even the rumble of the tube as it runs beneath my home is a comfort. The first night or two I sleep somewhere in the country is always a poor night’s sleep as it’s too quiet. Cities are people and life and they make noise, thankfully! 
Period conversions are the worst. Converting properties that were designed as single family homes into flats while retaining all the period features results in no sound isolation between the floors and some walls. Throw in TVs, surround sound, occupants on different schedules or inconsiderate ones that install hard wood floors and you have expensive properties that are a nightmare to live in. 
We really do need to improve noise insulation standards for modern and older homes (retrofitting as necessary). One of the social “goodies” I’d relish would be the creation of a free diagnostic service on offer to all complainants about noisy neighbours (and to the allegedly noisy neighbours themselves). Very many noise problems aren’t due to the lack of consideration by either side - they’re to do with the construction and refurbishments of the properties and the failures of earlier bodged approaches to noise insulation. 
The loudest noises I experience in London, including inside my room, are sirens. They should be redesigned to be more directional (i.e. forwards towards cars and not sideways towards pedestrians and homes)