The 
One of the most biodiverse ecosystems in the 
“Throughout the Caribbean, we have seen a massive decrease in coral coverage,” says Michael Webster, executive director of the 
Now, the rapidly changing climate could make the damage even worse. “We’re seeing these huge variations in rainfall, temperature, weather,” says Amanda Acosta, executive director of the 
The impacts of these rapid weather changes are already being witnessed across the reef system. Jesús Arias-González, a researcher at the National Polytechnic Institute in Mexico, conducted a study of the entire region last year and found 22% of the coral colonies presented signs of bleaching from elevated sea temperatures. The bleaching could soon get worse: in September the US’s National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration began issuing 
But although this level of damage is concerning, for many scientists who spoke to the Guardian the more pressing threat is mass tourism. “Climate change happens long term,” Arias-González says. “The massive development happening right now is much more dangerous.”
“The bleaching is certainly getting worse every year,” says Vanessa Francisco, a field officer with 
The growth of mass tourism as well as farming has resulted in an increase of untreated waste and agricultural runoff on to the reef; a 
The increase in waste acts as a fertiliser to macroalgae, a kind of fleshy algae that can compete with and eventually smother or kill the corals. According to the 
According to Webster, from the 
Mary Peter, 35, is a diving instructor in the tiny town of Xcalak, on the border between Mexico and Belize. Last year, Xcalak was hit by 
The increase in waste acts as a ​​fertiliser to macroalgae, a fleshy algae ​​that competes with and kills the corals
This kind of destruction and recovery is part of the reef’s natural ebb and flow: However, with hurricanes and storms 
To stave off damage, scientists and nonprofit groups across the region are working with local communities to reduce overfishing, minimise pollution and strengthen the reef. “Climate change is a world issue,” says Webster. “We’re working to solve problems at a community level so we can give the reef a better chance to adapt to those global problems.”
Miguel Jarillo is a fisherman in Mexico’s Banco Chinchorro, the largest atoll in the northern hemisphere and a Unesco biosphere reserve. Ten years ago, he was trained by the 
In Belize, too, there is an increasing awareness of the reef as a vital economic resource, generating 15% of the country’s GDP. When the government began seismic tests for offshore oil near the reef last year, the outcry from the community in the tourist town of San Pedro was such that authorities 
There are signs that conservation efforts are paying off, albeit extremely slowly. According to HRI’s 
But designating marine-protected zones only achieves so much. “Up to now, the decree is just on paper,” says HRI’s Marisol Rueda Flores, pointing out that the Mexican government has simultaneously