The proportion of parents who drive their children to school rather than walk or cycle is on the rise despite growing concerns about the impact of air pollution on young people’s health.
New figures from the government’s 
It also revealed an overall increase the number of people using cars or vans instead of walking for journeys of less than two miles, which campaigners say has a major impact on air pollution and obesity.
Earlier this month, the Guardian highlighted how schools and local authorities across the UK were 
, a charity that campaigns to increase walking and cycling, said the figures underlined the challenge of persuading people to abandon their cars for the school run and other short journeys
“The rise in people using their car for journeys that could be walked shows that Britain’s illegal levels of air pollution are set to continue.”
Irvin called on the government to act decisively to make it as easy as possible for children and parents to walk to school.
Xavier Brice, chief executive of walking and cycling charity Sustrans said the findings highlighted the need for concerted government action on both walking and cycling if it was to improve not only air pollution but childhood obesity.
“These results show the critical need to invest in cycling and walking infrastructure in our towns and cities to enable more people to walk and cycle for everyday journeys. In a week when Public Health England has released its 
The Guardian found that thousands of schools in UK cities and towns – from Edinburgh to London, Manchester to Ellesmere Port – are taking measures to try to deter parents using their cars.
Last year, the government set the 
The findings come amid growing concern about the illegal levels of air pollution in the UK and the impact on human health – particularly that of children. Earlier this month, a medical expert said the hospital admissions 
And last year 
The government has been defeated three times in court over its air pollution plans and is now 
Doctors say children were particularly vulnerable to the impacts of air pollution, with damage to the lungs in early age irreversible, and a clear link between children breathing in dirty air and chronic chest problems later in life.
A Department for Transport spokesperson said the government was committed to making walking more accessible “to everyone through our £1.2bn cycling and walking investment strategy.”
They added: “We are taking a number of steps to boost the number of primary school children walking to school, including supporting Living Streets through their ‘walk to school’ campaign, which aims to make this the natural choice for pupils.”