Catherine Bazell looks out from her first floor flat towards the familiar landmarks of central 
“Me and my mum and dad used to love taking bus trips for the day when I was a girl,” says the 73-year-old. “We would get a bus and just go off exploring different bits of the city.”
Bazell pauses for a moment before adding: “I wish I could do that now with my granddaughter but there’s no way, the pollution is just too bad.”
Bazell was born in London during the second world war and suffers from the debilitating lung condition bronchiectasis as well as asthma, leaving her all but housebound during the worst bouts of air pollution.
“I was born with a bad chest but it slowly started to get better when they brought in the 
Bazell is one of hundreds of thousands of people whose lives are blighted by 
A spate of recent reports have underlined the scale of the crisis; 
“Almost every week we are seeing more evidence of the damage air pollution is doing to the nation’s health,” said Alison Cook, director of policy at the British Lung Foundation . “It’s simply unacceptable that people in towns and cities across the country – particularly the young, the elderly and those with existing lung conditions – are being given no choice but to breathe dangerously dirty air in 2018.”
The government claims to be tackling the issue but many experts say it has repeatedly failed to take meaningful action. Ministers have refused calls for a new Clean Air Act and the government 
However, some cities are starting to face up to the challenge. In Manchester the mayor, Andy Burnham, has said air pollution is one of his priorities and earlier this year he unveiled 
But the most ambitious scheme is in London, where the mayor, Sadiq Khan, is planning an “
The plan has been batted back and forth between officials at Transport for London (TfL) and City Hall for five years. The final proposals unveiled in June show diesel cars – the main source of NO2 pollution – will have to pass the 
The scheme has been broadly welcomed by environmental groups and clean air campaigners. However many say the restrictions should be tougher, since the limit on diesel vehicles will still allow some of the worst polluting cars and vans on the road. And many believe the scheme should cover a wider area and be brought in sooner.
Caroline Russell, who sits on the London assembly for the Green party, said Khan’s plans were “thorough and comprehensive” but she urged him to go further, quicker and “be braver.”
Russell, who chairs the environment committee on the assembly, says there is no reason the expanded zone should stop at the North and South circular, arguing it should stretch to include London’s outer boroughs up to the M25. And she said the new system should be based on a road pricing scheme, allowing vehicles to be charged differing amounts depending, not just on emissions, but also on which roads they are using at what time of day.
“We have a real chance to do something that will transform this city – to leave behind our old-fashioned reliance on fossil fuel, private vehicle-based transport in favour of a modern forward-looking system based around efficient, accessible public transport, walking and cycling.”
 The expanded Ulez area will be enforced using number plate recognition cameras that will automatically charge cars that flout the emissions limits a daily rate – a similar system to the existing congestion charge zone. As well as monitoring NO2 pollution it will also include a “particulate matter standard”, after the Guardian revealed 
And the plans have even got the backing of many of the major motoring groups . The RAC said it “could not fault the mayor’s crusade to tackle air pollution”. Private hire firms Addison Lee and Uber both welcome the move.
However black cabs, which according to TfL figures are responsible for 20% of NO2 pollution in central London, will be excluded. This has led to criticism that the mayor is not tackling one of the key polluters. Officials point out that since the beginning of 2018 all new black cabs have to be electric, although old ones will be allowed to continue running for 15 years.
Steve McNamara, general secretary of the Licensed Taxi Drivers Association, says his members would be happy to be included in Ulez as long as private hire firms such as Uber are only allowed to buy electric vehicles too.
“All we want is a level playing field … we really don’t want to be driving round in these dirty vehicles, we just need a fair deal to get out of them.”
Despite the widespread support for Khan’s plans, some residents are sceptical of the mayor’s commitment to cleaning up London’s air. 
They point to the 
Local resident Darryl Chamberlain said Khan’s support for such a big road-building programme made a mockery of his claims to be serious about tackling pollution.
“He [Khan] is a world-class hypocrite,” said Chamberlain. “The Silvertown tunnel will increase traffic and pollution for London and particularly for local people but they have just ignored our concerns.”
Many want the mayor to go further, faster, but most argue that after the inaction of his predecessor, Boris Johnson, London is at last heading in the right direction.
Back at her flat, Bazell says that if the pollution today was as visible as it was when she was a girl people would be up in arms.
And she says that although she tries to live an active life, her world is increasingly shaped – and restricted – by the poisonous air she breathes.
Looking out to the distant London landmarks, she says: “I rarely go into central London any more. There are a few buses or trains I can get to visit family if the pollution is not too bad, but it is not that easy.”
Bazell says that a few weeks ago she had to miss her choir session at the local hospital because the pollution was so severe.
She looks up with a smile. “It comes to something when the air is too dirty to sing!”