More than three quarters of the 43m cars tampered with in the 
It will probably take another two years to recall the remaining 33m vehicles that were tampered with, according to 
Florent Grelier, the clean vehicles engineer for Transport and Environment which conducted the analysis, said: “The current snail’s pace to clean up diesel cars across 
“It’s time for governments to get tough and order mandatory recalls across the EU. This does not require any new laws, just political will.”
EU sources accepted the analysis but said they did not want to “emotionalise” the debate by framing the lack of action by member states as unacceptable.
One official said: “We agree that much more needs to be done on recall actions and we’ve been stressing that from the beginning. It’s a delicate balance as we have a responsibility to work with member states in a constructive spirit and it is not our role to blackmail specific states. But if their cars are not in line with EU legislation, that needs to be remedied.”
Under current single market rules, national type-approval authorities are responsible for recalling faulty vehicles. This can create a problem if a car was, for example, approved in Luxembourg before being marketed in France and then sold in Romania.
From 1 September 2020, the European commission will be given powers to increase checks on new cars, directly initiate their recall and impose fines of up to €30,000 (£25,000) per non-compliant vehicle.
However, this will not affect Dieselgate-era cars, 350,000 of which were exported 
In the UK, while 75% of Volkswagen (VW) EA189 engines at the heart of the Dieselgate scandal have been reclaimed, no data for recalls of any other affected engines – including 
“The EU single market fails when it comes to car emissions,” Grelier said. “It only works for selling cars, but not for recalling them when things go wrong. There must not be any second-class citizens in Europe. Every European has an equal right to clean air.”
In 2015, tests revealed that VW and several other carmakers were 
In real world situations, the automobiles emitted more than three times the legal limits for pollutants such as nitrogen dioxide, which is responsible for 
The scandal shocked the world and more than 250 European cities have since taken action against polluting vehicles on their roads.