ettina Maidment hasn’t emptied the kitchen bin since the beginning of November. The time before that was in August. “You can reduce your rubbish a lot,” she insists, pointing to her recycling and food compost bins. “I have two kids and they’re pretty anti-plastic – I am their mother after all – but it is do-able.”
Maidment, 38, is the founder of 
Then came bamboo toothbrushes, swapping out supermarket shopping for the local greengrocer, and making deodorant, cleanser, moisturiser and handsoap at home. She opens her fridge to reveal shelves of glass jars and reusable containers; her larder is stocked with lentils, pasta, porridge and the like, bought in bulk and stored in glass or canvas bags.
“At the moment, there are all these headlines about sales in shops being down, but maybe everyone has enough stuff.”
Her aim, she says, is to instil the principle in her sons, who are three and six, “that they can be happy with as little as possible”.
She is not alone. As public anger grows over the environmental impact of single-use plastic, trying to live plastic-free and more sustainably has become a mainstream concept. “There was a huge uptick in the conversation after 
Maidment admits that her gradual awareness of the amount of plastic and litter in the street has become an obsession. Now, everything that can be is reused, recycled, bought on eBay or sourced from a charity shop. The family have had their second “buy nothing new” Christmas. Maidment’s husband works as an engineer in sustainable design but she didn’t tell him about her project at the beginning.
“My interest was piqued online and I saw how other people were doing it and slowly started reducing my waste.” She 
For Kiran Harrison, 43, who works as a massage therapist and storyteller in Worthing, West Sussex.the impetus to go plastic-free came around the time her son, now nine months, was born. She visited her local cloth nappy library, where parents can loan reusable nappies, and gradually began swapping out the plastics in her home. “Nappies are the number one offender,” she says. “And cloth nappies are so much easier than people realise.”
Harrison says she has “always lived consciously” but began thinking about the environment more after becoming fed up by the waste of supermarket food packaging. “For me, it’s about moving towards an existence that is as kind to the environment as possible,” she says. “I am concerned about the world my son and granddaughter are growing up in, it’s important to me that I am an example of how to live.”
Like Maidment, Harrison makes her own moisturiser. Toothpaste and deodorant come from a jar but she can’t face giving up her shampoo just yet. “I’m Asian and have thick hair – I really love my hair!” She laughs. “But it’s not about feeling bad about what you’re 
“Some people are cynical about how you can sustain a lifestyle like this,” she admits, “or cynical about making a small contribution when big companies produce so much waste, but I’m not down with the ‘what’s the point of doing anything, we’re all doomed’ brigade – it’s far too apathetic for my liking.”
Harrison’s top tip is to “do things gradually so they become a habit. Trying to do everything at once is overwhelming.”
Friends of the Earth, which established a UK network in 1970, launched its 
Last week the government 
Waleed Akhtar, an actor from London, says: “The idea that the 150 or whatever toothbrushes I’ve used in my life will still be on this earth 400 years after I’ve gone is horrible to me.” In his profession, he says it takes “a high level of organisation going out on tour that you don’t always have, but when you start with plastic, you start thinking more about our disposable culture in general and become more mindful”.
Akhtar uses beeswax wraps rather than clingfilm for his sandwiches and carries a reusable water bottle, bamboo cutlery, Tupperware and a reusable bag everywhere he goes. “We need to get away from the idea that going plastic-free is sort of seen as a bougie, white, middle-class aspiration,” he says. “I used to drink bottled water every day, but I did a play called 
Applying a plastic-free philosophy can, he admits, be challenging in shared accommodation. “I’ve recently moved back home, and getting my mum fully on board is a process. She gets it, and she comes from a culture that isn’t wasteful, but there are so many small decisions to make every day about reducing your damage to the planet.”