irst they came for the 
Sadiq Khan, who we thought was our friend, has written to Michael Gove (of all people). He is asking for increased powers to tackle air pollution in London. Which is fine. 
That’s right. Our wood-burning stoves. The wood-burning stoves we installed just five years ago, partly because we were told this was environmentally friendly and partly because Victorian houses were designed around a fireplace focal-point and, really, all that 1970s boarding-up was an appalling lapse in taste. Yes, some of us opted straightforwardly for the open fire, a little guilty about the absence of fuel efficiency. It’s expensive, installing a wood-burning stove, after all. And, occasionally, you’re entitled to wonder, surely: “What difference to the tragedy of global warming at this frighteningly rapid pace will my own one little indulgence make?”
Also, it is very nice to sit on our Oka sofas, gazing at our William Scott prints, giving our Danish pottery the occasional pat, yet feeling close to nature, primal even, as the flames flicker over our faces, just as they have always done, ever since the fire lighter was invented.
Who could begrudge us a little touch of elemental power, trapped behind glass within the sanctuary of our own homes? Who could deny us the satisfied feeling that honest labour has been honestly done, when we say to the log-delivery man: “Over there, please”? 
Khan, no doubt, blames particulates. They are an easy scapegoat. Earlier in the year, research was published in the New Scientist, suggesting that “
As for 
Previously, anti-pollution campaigners have focused on violations of nitrogen dioxide levels. The campaign group 
Except, of course, that the whole wood-burning myth comes under this category too. In order to embrace the harmless naked flame idea, one had merely blithely to suppress common sense. Global anti-poverty and justice campaigners, for example, have been highlighting the 
How anyone ever believed that directing all this filth into the air outside our homes made all that danger go away is the actual mystery here. Yet, I know for a fact that a prominent green used to pride himself on dragging wheelie bins full of discarded wood back home to provide ethically warming recycled fuel, and advised others to follow suit. The madness.
I’m totally guilty myself of the magical thinking that allows us to believe that the things that we want for ourselves are harmless, even moral. I got my chimneys relined some years ago, so that I could get away a bit from the evil grasp of the energy companies while simultaneously making sense of my handsome black slate fireplaces.
It finally got through to me, earlier in the year, that fires were part of the problem in 
 Deborah Orr is a Guardian columnist