t’s almost funny – the start of a comedian’s dark, sardonic joke in an Edinburgh fringe show. We are in the midst of a climate emergency, 
Taking a flight from London to Edinburgh results in 
The British population is now increasingly concerned 
Some solutions are simple: state intervention to nationalise the railways and further subsidise prices would be a start. Meanwhile, 
Drink-driving might be the most convenient form of transport for the person at the wheel, but as a society we’ve come to accept this restriction on our travel liberty given the harm it does. Why should unnecessary internal air travel be any different? 
Restricting internal flights is, however, only a part of the solution – other elements are a little more complex. Even if train travel was made more affordable, there’s no escaping the fact it takes longer to travel by rail. From London to Edinburgh, that might only be an hour or two one you’ve factored in check-in, security and travel to the airport. But for longer distances the difference can be days. The flight time to Barcelona is just over two hours, yet it’s more than 11 hours to Barcelona on the train each way. For those with permanent employment, limited annual leave days are precious; self-employed people and those on zero-hours contracts rarely have designated holiday time at all. So you not only pay more money for the train, you also pay more in terms of leave taken.
Who wants to waste time cooped up on a carriage when you could be exploring Florence or sunning yourself on a Barcelona beach? But when a single return flight to Berlin clocks up the same amount of carbon as 13 return trips by train, we have to find a way.
It’s why employers must also take on some of the burden. Schemes such as 
“Climate Perks employers show the world that they aren’t just ahead of the curve on flight-free travel, they’re bending it in the right direction,” Emma Kemp, a 10:10 campaigner, explained to me. “The more people that make a planet-friendly choice for their next holiday, the quicker we’ll reach the low-carbon destination we all want.”
Of course, travel is only one part of the global climate crisis, but it’s an area in which we can – with relatively little action – radically reduce the harm being done. To do so will require state intervention and employers making adjustments, and yes – we might have to briefly embrace our inner Michael Portillo when it comes to spending time sitting on trains.
 Michael Segalov is a contributing editor at