shot this in 
I travelled there as part of the Arctic project I did with 
I knew Norilsk would feature heavily in the story, because it is a place where you can understand the tragic history of 
The city was founded in the late 1930s to meet wartime demand for metal. It was built on the ice by prisoners who were shipped in. The nickel factory you see in the photograph was built first, in 1942, followed by a copper factory and the Nadejda metallurgical complex. The city grew, surrounded by chimneys. When I first travelled there in the 1990s, the pollution was overwhelming. You could not breathe, and barely see. At the time, though, no one cared: it was the last thing anybody thought about.
Thousands of prisoners were shipped to Norilsk. It was a one-way ticket. Nobody knows exactly how many perished
In June 2018, I spent about two weeks there and a local historian showed me round. I commented on how odd it was that there were no trees, but that there was some green. He told me that the green was where the prisoners were buried. There are graveyards everywhere. Thousands and 
In the 1990s, people in the town were allowed to put up a memorial sign for the prisoners – Ukrainians, Lithuanians, Jews, Russians – who had died there. In the port city of 
The nickel plant was shut down in 2016, after President Putin threatened 
Partly because the factory is now abandoned, fewer people live now in Norilsk than in Soviet times. There is a programme for retired workers to move to the mainland – this city is not a place to retire – and others moved to the company’s other sites.
The centre looks like St Petersburg. There were talented architects among the prisoners – they made it beautiful
What you see here isn’t a river, but an artificial lake, which was used in the metallurgical process. Guards live and work there: you can see one of them on the boat headed towards the structure in the middle of the water (coincidentally, he’s also headed in the direction of the 
The centre of Norilsk looks and feels like Saint Petersburg. This is not because Stalin fantasised about building the most beautiful town in the Arctic Circle. Rather, 
The prisoners sent to gulag were often educated people. That’s how the city was built within four years and production in the plant started within two. In fact one of the founders of the city was a prisoner: 
Talking about this aspect of Russian history is important. I don’t think the story of what happened in Stalinist times has been properly told. It is all connected to Russian identity, that sense of pride that comes from knowing how to survive in the north.