One of Australia’s most famous beaches, Coogee, has joined its Sydney neighbour Bondi in receiving a clean bill of health in the latest assessment of 
But problems still persist at 
Until now, Coogee had failed to make the grade and had been classified as having poor water quality. The main reason for the change, detailed in the annual 
In general, open ocean beaches in NSW have excellent water quality, with 98% of 140 monitored ocean beaches graded as very good or good. This indicates they were suitable for swimming most or almost all of the time. 
This was a slight improvement on 2015-16, when 97% of ocean beaches were graded as very good or good. Overall, of the 250 sites where water quality was tested, 84% were graded as good or very good. These sites were suitable for swimming most or almost all of the time. 
But rainfall can change the water quality quickly and most beaches and harbour, lake and estuarine swimming spots carry warnings about swimming after rain.
In general, swimming should be avoided during heavy rain and for up to a day afterwards at ocean beaches and up to three days at estuarine sites, as they take longer to flush.
Fifty-eight (73%) of the 79 estuarine swimming sites were graded as very good or good, a slight decline on the previous year. These swimming sites were typically located in the well flushed sections of the estuaries or had few potential sources of faecal contamination. 
Seventeen of the estuarine beaches were graded as poor, including Rose Bay beach and Tambourine Bay in Sydney Harbour, Carss Point baths and Oatley Bay baths in the lower Georges River and Horderns beach in Port Hacking. 
Several were graded as fair, due to their proximity to stormwater outlets.
The NSW environment minister, Gabrielle Upton, said stormwater generated by heavy rain was a major cause of pollution in recreational waters. 
“Councils and water authorities are constantly investing in improving water quality. It’s important to remember whatever is thrown on the ground may end up in stormwater and eventually lead into waterways,” she said. 
Very heavy rainfall and large swells affected much of the NSW coastline in early June 2016 due to a significant east coast low storm. Dry periods persisted in the later months of 2016 and into early 2017, but wet conditions returned in February 2017, followed by the wettest March on record for many coastal areas.
Exposure to contaminated water can cause gastroenteritis, with symptoms including vomiting, diarrhoea, stomach ache, nausea, headache and fever. Eye, ear, skin and upper respiratory tract infections can also be contracted when pathogens come into contact with small breaks and tears in the skin or ruptures of the delicate membranes in the ear or nose.