in London has reached the legal limit for the whole of 2018 less than a month into the year, prompting calls for the government to “get a grip and show they’re serious about protecting health”.
Toxic air has been at illegal levels in the capital and most urban areas in the UK since 2010 and results in around 40,000 early deaths a year.
The date of this year’s reaching of the limit, at Brixton Road in Lambeth, is actually a significant improvement on previous years: for the last decade air pollution has reached illegal levels no later than six days into the year.
The improvement is partly the result of 
Clean air plans put forward by ministers have already twice been declared illegal at the high court for failing to cut air pollution in the “shortest time possible”, as EU law requires. The government is now 
“Londoners are still breathing filthy air on a daily basis,” said Simon Alcock at ClientEarth. “There’s much more to do. But the mayor can’t solve this problem alone. Ministers have to get a grip and show they’re serious about protecting our health by committing to real action to tackle our toxic air.”
Modern air pollution records for London began 18 years ago and Khan said this is the first time 
The law requires that the hourly measurement of toxic nitrogen dioxide (NO2) must not exceed 200 micrograms per cubic metre (µg/m3) more than 18 times in a whole year. But 
Over the year, the most polluted places have vastly exceeded this in the past. In 2016 Putney high street broke the hourly limit more than 1,200 times. Khan’s cleaner bus plan is now 
Air quality has also improved on Oxford Street, which 
ClientEarth’s barrister told the high court last week that the government’s own assessment showed “a very significant impact on human health for many years” with pollution not forecast to fall below legal limits until 2028 in London and 2021 in most other urban areas.
The government’s own analysis 
Nitrogen dioxide pollution, mostly produced by diesel vehicles, has been illegally high in most urban parts of Britain since 2010. The government’s latest plan, produced in July, was condemned as 
Particulate pollution is also a serious health hazard and, while levels are generally under existing legal limits, research released in October showed 
Khan is introducing a wide ultra-low emissions zone in London in 2019 and planning to limit the use of wood-burning stoves in future. “The government also urgently needs to set out plans for a vehicle scrappage scheme that removes the filthiest cars off our roads,” he said.
“We need clean air action and that is what the government are delivering,” environment minister Thérèse Coffey 
Oliver Hayes, at Friends of the Earth, said: “The frequency and severity of these pollution spikes shows we’ve still got a long way to go in cleaning up our air. It’s high time we reimagined our cities so that people – not cars – come first. Our health, our sense of community, and our wellbeing depend on it.”
In September, the UN’s special rapporteur on pollution said the