City wakes up on any given weekday, most of its citizens participate in a familiar, survival-of-the-fittest routine: commuting in the car-dependent megapolis. It is one of honking, tire-screeching, yelling 
The Via Verde project has focused on “turning Mexico City’s grey to green” through the construction of vertical gardens on columns along the Periférico highway, which rings the central city. The photogenic plants climbing up the freeway barriers have featured in countless videos in the 
There is a political fear of limiting the space in the city that is devoted to cars
However, a small but vocal group of activists argues that the government’s support for Via Verde indicates its willingness to double-down on car culture in a city that is already choked with traffic and smog. The “greening” of the highway is simply making car ownership marginally more pleasant, they say.
“In Mexico City, almost all of our local pollution and mobility problems can be attributed to the excessive use of private cars,” says Sergio Andrade-Ochoa, public health coordinator for the NGO Liga Peatonal. “We could just plant trees, but there’s a political fear of limiting the space in the city that is currently devoted to cars.”
The idea for Via Verde emerged in 2016, when architect Fernando Ortiz Monasterio of the firm Verde Vertical started a 
The petition also assured supporters of the project’s minimal impact: the vertical garden technology does not jeopardise a wall’s structural integrity, while drip irrigation uses rainwater and other non-potable sources. Monasterio’s friend, the actor Luis Gerardo Méndez, helped publicise the petition and it quickly amassed the 80,000 signatures needed
“All these groups were involved in revising this citizen proposal because it sounded like something that would do Mexico City good,” said the former head of Mexico City’s government, Miguel Ángel Mancera Espinosa, in 2016. “Via Verde could simultaneously change the look of the city and help us meet today’s biggest commitment: the fight against climate change.”
When it came to funding, Verde Vertical also looked to public opinion. Organisers 
Construction on greening the 1,000 concrete columns began later in 2016 and, so far the plants are thriving. Monasterio, sitting at the window of his office overlooking the Via Verde, is pleased with the way things have worked out: “I’m a capitalist-environmentalist,” he says with a laugh.
Others, however, are less pleased. The Liga Peatonal says the project has failed to live up to its environmental promises. In a 
While plants are crucial for combating climate change, using plants to mitigate air pollution through the process of 
The current Via Verde website has no mention of local anti-pollution benefits, and Monasterio acknowledges that the carbon reduction impact of the project is negligible. Roberto Remes of the city’s Autoridad del Espacio Público says that meeting greenhouse gas and local emissions goals was “never the intention”.
One graphic illustrates that building a single Via Verde column costs the same as planting 300 trees. In a city with a deficit of green space, it is a powerful image.
While Via Verde is privately funded, it is an effort that the government has eagerly co-signed. The Liga Peatonal is among several activists groups who believe the project is a facelift that distracts from other, less-sustainable actions that the city has recently taken.
“There has been a lot of hypocrisy within the government,” says Ochoa. “They celebrate this Via Verde as the project that’s going to create a garden within the city, then they chop down more than 3,000 trees to construct the Mixcoac interchange [recently completed in the south of the city].
“The idea of turning a grey city green feels good to its inhabitants. But in reality it’s just aesthetics. At the end of the day, it’s not going to change the city.”