he farm, located at the end of a narrow dirt path, announces its presence with a piercing stench. At first, the caretaker of the collective facility in Kunming says the farm recycles all the animal waste into manure fertiliser. But later, he sheepishly points behind the pigsty.
There, hordes of flies swarm above a festering field of grey-black dung. A few times a month, Cai shovels the steaming excrement produced by some 100 swine owned by local families into a nearby creek, where a mile downstream, villagers fish on the rocky shores of a small lake.
The hilltop fishing spot feeds into Dianchi Lake in south-western Yunnan province, a major tourist attraction and one of China’s largest fresh water bodies. Dianchi is famous for a number of reasons: its sheer size (nearly 40km long), its distinctive “crescent moon” shape and the surrounding scenic hills and rock gardens. But it has another distinguishing feature; for several decades, each summer the surface of Dianchi has turned bright green from algae blooms 
Eutrophication 
Polluted water is a chronic problem in China, with citizens increasingly speaking out in frustration and even 
Animal husbandry is a 
China’s surging appetite for meat has compounded the problem. Pork is by far the most popular type of meat consumed nationally, and the humble pig enjoys an exalted status in Chinese culture as a lucky creature symbolising prosperity and peace.
But environmentalists say the average citizen in 
In Dianchi Lake the algal bloom is so heavy that when speedboats pass near the boardwalk, they spray a green-tinged wake. On the beaches of the north-eastern coastal city of Qingdao, the algae is so thick in summers that tourists cannot even wade through so they 
Some argue that the problem may be particularly acute in Yunnan because of the high concentration of pig farms in the province, which is partly fuelled by the fact locals eat a lot of pork. Last year, pork production reached 6.1m tonnes and comprised 77% of all meat production in the province, according to 
Cai cannot afford to eat much meat. He comes from a destitute part of the neighbouring province of Guizhou and has only lived in Kunming for two years. He sleeps in a shed next to the pigsty and has never heard of Dianchi Lake, let alone eutrophication.
The joint family farm he manages is part of a 
The underlying issue is economic, says Prof Rachel Stern, who specialises in environmental law in China at UC Berkeley. “The local government is reluctant to impose expensive pollution reduction requirements on small farms that can ill afford them.
“In other pollution hotspots, local governments have typically solved similar issues either by providing pollution reduction subsidies, or coming up with an economic re-development plan to re-employ those who lose their livelihood,” she says.
It is a similar sight at another small pig farm around 50km away from Dianchi Lake, where a plot of agricultural land stands next to apartments towers. Animal faeces is piled up beside a small pigsty.
“Generally the way the government tries to solve water pollution is to shut down small animal farms and to make them into bigger factories,” says Wang Jing, head of Greenpeace East Asia’s food and agriculture programme.
“But this disrupts the pre-existing loop of agriculture in China which is to recycle animal waste into fertiliser using traditional methods. Some of the biggest farms do have industrial converters on site but they’re disincentivised to use them because they’re not legally obliged to and the cost of running the machine costs more than the value of the fertiliser produced,” Wang says.
One of the country’s biggest pig farms in Kunming, Yunnan Southwest Tianyou Animal Husbandry Technology Co, received a ministry of agriculture 
Protected by high brick walls and a pack of guard dogs, it houses some 10,000 pigs for supply to the national market. Its website boasts the farm uses top agricultural technologies. Photographs in local media show pigs in pristine pens.
“We opened here in 2008 and in 2010 we started using an industrial machine to convert waste into fertiliser. It was an important thing to do to protect the water and the soil,” says Ge Tao, a sales representative for the company.
“Some farms have it but some don’t. It’s not a government regulation to have it,” Ge says, adding that he wasn’t sure how waste was processed before 2010.
Reflecting on the green sludge in Dianchi, Ge says even though it is caused by various factors, privately owned farms should do their part to reduce pollution. However, the Guardian was not permitted to tour the company’s grounds because of quarantine policies, and could not confirm whether the fertiliser converter was being operated.