orrado Nicora is talking about the flyest Vespa in Genoa: his own. For his 50th birthday, the secretary of 
Not being able to find a particular Vespa in Genoa – Nicora believes there are only three tangerine GTS 300s here – is weird in a city where the Vespa is king. Fewer people own cars in Genoa than in any other Italian city apart from Venice; there are an estimated 180,000 motorbikes and scooters in Genoa, among a population of 600,000. Among them, the aristocrats are the 20,000 Vespa owners. The creator of the Vespa, Rinaldo Piaggio, was born in Genoa and the original Piaggio factory was in the city’s Sestri Ponente district. Lambretta, Vespa’s rival in the retro-scooter stakes, is practically a dirty word. (“No, no, no, no,” says Nicora, when I mention it.)
The Vespa, which is now manufactured in Pontedera, Tuscany, quickly became a worldwide ambassador for Italian style. Its elegant swooping chassis symbolised postwar modernity and freedom, and, in later years, a kind of retro connoisseur taste. But the brand seems ageless: total global sales have passed 18m.
Which makes it even more surprising that 
We have to make sure that the most polluting engines are no longer in the centre
But the new mayor, Marco Bucci, has promised to resurrect similar measures. The municipality has not released details of its upcoming transport policy, which is due to be announced later this year, but it will prioritise a transition to electric vehicles, with subsidised electricity for users. Ominously for diehard Vespa riders, Bucci has promised: “We have to make sure that the most polluting engines are no longer in the centre.”
Although it seems surprising that Genoa would want to tar its beloved city mascot, scooters have acquired dirty overtones in European policy circles. The two-stroke engine that powered the Vespa to worldwide fame burns a mixture of oil and gasoline, producing as much pollution as 30-50 four-stroke ones, according to some estimates. This year, Amsterdam 
Bucci is also keen to project a modern, progressive image for Genoa, a mission made more urgent in the wake of the 
It could be that the Vespa is an easy target for Bucci: moped sales are falling, even in 
Seventy years ago, Vespa was the acme of modern metropolitan living. It started becoming an urban icon in 1946, when Rinaldo Piaggio’s son Enrico decided the company should create a form of affordable transport for the masses. An aeronautical engineer, Corradino d’Ascanio, came up with the poised, narrow-waisted design that gave the new machine its name: “wasp” in Italian.
The scooter was particularly adapted to scrappy urban conditions and postwar consumers who favoured convenience, says Nick Broomhall, UK spokesman for Piaggio. “You’ve got to imagine what Italy’s roads were like after the war. Let’s get a device that’s light and easy to manoeuvre, and that you can ride without getting dirty, because the engine was totally enclosed.”
The Vespa was ... a magical instrument, which I never really desired, because it was beyond every possible desire
Marketed equally at women and men, the Vespa quickly became a symbol of a kind of mobility, freedom, emancipation and romance that is most possible in cities. Umberto Eco, in an 
Piaggio put out just 2,500 of the original 98cc Vespa, but by 1956 it had already sold 1m. Prior to mass TV ownership, Piaggio generated a buzz through the network of Italian Vespa clubs, of which there were 111 by 1952; they lined up for organised scooter races, such as the 1,000km rally with prize money of 5m lira (£2,200 today). Those clubs still proliferate and, though the company no longer controls them, members still receive an insurance discount.
Vespas also featured in many films of the time, including Luchino Visconti’s 
The Vespa took on a countercultural spin in the 1960s when it was adopted, along with the Lambretta, as a key component of the mod wardrobe: most famously, Sting rides a GS Rally Vespa in his role as Ace Face in 
In Genoa, it’s not a fashion. We use it.
In Genoa, though, the Vespa is part of the furniture. Perfectly adapted to nipping in and out of the alleys of the historical centre, it is not the retro fetish object it has become in Milan or Rome, let alone London or New York. “In Genoa, it’s not a fashion,” says Nicora. “We use it.”
Vespas slip seamlessly into the tightly parked ranks of two-wheelers that flank the city’s streets, lining piazzas and courtyards, and underneath the flyover on Via Aurelia. Everyone uses them: tattooed millennials, bespectacled housewives, grannies riding in tandem. There is none of the free-for-all traffic slaloms you see in other Mediterranean cities such as Marseille; they slot in an orderly fashion into the traffic flow. Vespas seem vital here: public transport coverage is thin in Genoa, with a single, eight-station metro line, and the Ligurian hills, rising steeply up from the port, aren’t bike-friendly.
No wonder the locals took up arms to defend their scooters. It was the city’s three Vespa clubs, along with local motorbike associations,
The whole motorcycle and scooter industry is suffering in that they don’t appeal to younger people
Broomhall goes as far as to suggest that scooters could provide a solution to mounting congestion problems and reduce idling emissions by keeping traffic moving. He cites a 2011
Nevertheless, Broomhall admits that Piaggio is fighting to stay relevant in the 21st century. “The motorcycle and scooter industry is suffering in that they don’t appeal to younger people,” he says. “If they have money, they prefer to spend it on a gadget.”
In Genoa, however, the Vespa still stands for independence, urbanist trends be damned. Bucci is taking a softer line than his predecessor, promising the city’s Vespa owners “time to adapt”. But he is clear about his priorities. “Our strategy is to favour electric vehicles. With that in mind, two-stroke engines do not have long left.”
The local Vespa clubs have said they are ready to resume their fight. Nicora proudly shows off photos of his customised GTS 300 – with a matte-black exhaust, LED headlights and digital display – and waggles his fingers under his chin, the Italian gesture for exasperation. “People talk about globalisation, but you can’t control people. We are different from cities in the north of