t has been a classic summer in New Zealand: 
According to a 
Martin Taylor, the chief executive of Fish & Game 
According to the environment ministry, two-thirds of all rivers are now unswimmable and three-quarters of New Zealand’s native freshwater fish species are threatened with extinction. New Zealanders are now encouraged to check their local council websites for public health warnings before heading out for a day on the water. 
Declining water quality has coincided with a boom in New Zealand’s dairy industry – it is the largest exporter of dairy in the world. Cow effluent and fertiliser run-off are significant polluters of inland waterways, as are beef, sheep and deer farming. Mass deforestation and the extensive clearing of native wetlands has also played a significant role.
According to the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Science (Niwa), there is 
Dairy stock require rich, green pastures to produce the best milk, which has led to a proliferation of irrigation and fertiliser use. As the dairy herd has increased, their nitrate-rich effluent has flowed into the waterways, asphyxiating ecosystems, causing 
In 2016, four people died and 5,000 fell ill as a result of a gastroenteritis outbreak in the North Island town of Havelock North. The probable cause was sheep faeces contaminating the town’s water supply, a 
“I really thought that once people started dying, that things would change and people would take notice. However, that doesn’t seem to be the case,” said Prof Russell Death, an ecologist, 
“It still seems to me that water quality is not improving. If it is, it’s only very, very slowly improving. To my mind, there’s no convincing evidence that we’ve turned around the decline that’s been going on over the last 20 years.”
The Labour coalition government, led by the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, has pledged to make the country’s rivers and lakes swimmable within a generation, describing it as a “birthright” for New Zealanders. It is a more ambitious goal than that of the previous National government, which promised only to make them “wadeable”. But action has been slow, and experts say it has taken a back seat to housing and entrenched social welfare issues.
The environment minister, David Parker, caused an outcry last year when he told a current affairs show that New Zealand had too many cows, raising the possibility of a cap on numbers. Parker has since backed away from this statement and clarified that a nutrient run-off cap is more likely. Encouraging changes to land use in favour of more cropping and horticulture is also a government priority.
“There are some people who are in denial,”
Chris Lewis, the dairy chair for the Federated Farmers of New Zealand, acknowledged that the industry was “far from perfect” and said it was keen to change, with improvements expected within the next 10 years.
Taylor, the Fish & Game chief, said legislation was needed. “While many farmers do understand the need for action and are making the necessary changes to how they use their land, there are still significant numbers who are refusing to follow their example,” he said. “They have to be made to change.”