est Country asthmatics breathed a deep sigh of relief last week, as Bristol city council unveiled long-awaited plans for a clean air zone in the city. The 
If approved tomorrow, the scheme will come into force in 2021. It cannot come too soon for Bristol’s most vulnerable residents: illegally poor air quality currently contributes to 
Preliminary results from a similar scheme in London, the 
But one curious feature of the plans exposes Bristol’s clean air zone as a microcosm of national policy paralysis, and demonstrates a collective failure of imagination on transport and the environment. The city intends to charge commercial diesel vehicles including buses for entering the wider clean air zone – while exempting private cars. They argue that charging private motorists would disproportionately affect low-income households that depend on their cars to get around, and in the absence of alternatives this is undoubtedly true.
But this is exactly the wrong way of thinking about the problem. 
This is the heart of the issue. The years of foot-dragging and buck-passing between central government and city authorities on air quality are just one aspect of a fundamental societal intransigence. At every level of government, politicians have been too blinkered and cowardly to 
As a result, transport is now the 
While rural areas and small towns are likely to remain dependent on cars for the foreseeable future, major cities such as Bristol need to treat this existential imperative as a golden opportunity to improve quality of life for residents by making private cars completely obsolete. Bristol is well placed to lead this transition. It is one of only half a dozen places in the UK where more than half of all trips are already made 
Moreover, the city’s mayor, Marvin Rees, was one of the most senior Labour political leaders to sign up to the 
This is much more achievable than it may initially seem. Cars were always a perversely poor solution to the basic geometry problem of moving lots of people short distances around densely populated areas. Exciting new frontiers are opening up in urban personal transportation all the time now, from shared rides and vehicles, to 
More prosaically but just as importantly, more and more cities across Europe are realising that 
It can’t happen on its own. British society was systematically motorised through a series of investment and regulatory decisions in the 1950s and 60s, when the government forced the closure of thousands of miles of railway lines while constructing a thousand miles of new motorways. Deliberate choices by governments gave us the broken and toxic transport system we currently have, and they can give us the transport system we need to prosper in the 21st century too. But first we need the courage to imagine better, and then to demand it.
 Leo Murray is director of innovation at the climate change charity