Plastic pollution is being deposited into the fossil record, research has found, with contamination increasing exponentially since 1945.
Scientists suggest the plastic layers could be used to mark the start of 
The study, the first detailed analysis of the rise in plastic pollution in sediments, examined annual layers off the coast of 
Most of the plastic particles were fibres from synthetic fabrics used in clothes, indicating that plastics are flowing freely into the ocean through waste water.
“Our love of plastic is being left behind in our fossil record,” said Jennifer Brandon, at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of California San Diego, who led the study. “It is bad for the animals that live at the bottom of the ocean: coral reefs, mussels, oysters and so on. But the fact that it is getting into our fossil record is more of an existential question.
“We all learn in school about the stone age, the bronze age and iron age – is this going to be known as the plastic age?” she said. “It is a scary thing that this is what our generations will be remembered for.”
Sir David Attenborough, whose Blue Planet 2 TV series raised the profile of plastic pollution in the ocean, said in July attitudes were changing. He predicted polluting the planet would 
The research, 
Two-thirds of the particles were plastic fibres, a fifth were broken-down fragments of other plastic and a 10th were plastic film. “It is a very clear signature,” Brandon said. “Plastic was invented and pretty much immediately we can see it appear in the sedimentary record.”
A study in 2016 showed a 
Many millions of tonnes of plastic are discarded into the environment every year and are broken down into small particles and fibres that do not biodegrade. Microplastics have been found everywhere from the 
Research is limited but eating plastic is known to harm marine creatures. Humans are believed to consume at least 50,000 microplastic particles a year through food and water. The health impact is unknown but microplastics can release toxic substances and may penetrate tissues.
The latest research analysed a sediment core taken more than a mile offshore from Santa Barbara and close to the 4 million people that live in Los Angeles. This basin is naturally devoid of oxygen due to local current patterns, meaning there are no animals burrowing into the sediments and destroying the delicate annual layering.
The 36cm-long core was originally taken to assess fish populations over time. It had been wrapped in a plastic liner, but the scientists used a laser signature to identify this specific type of plastic and discount the small amount of contamination from their analysis.
The core was taken in 2010 but Brandon said there was no reason to think the exponential rise in plastic pollution had been curbed since then, as plastic production continued to rise. 
“I hope our study shows this is a very serious problem,” she said.