n estimated 
But 65 years on from the toxic 
Smog Day marks the anniversary of the Great London Smog, and the middle of the international smog season. It grew out of an initiative to share the experiences of people living with air pollution in 
Progress on air pollution is already being made in many places around the world. The recent 
Almost 200 countries are in the process of negotiating a series of resolutions on pollution at the United Nations, and cities around the world are being encouraged to be part of the 
Cities can learn quickly from each other about what works, with transport policies crucial. Curitiba in southern Brazil has been said to set the gold standard in sustainable urban planning, with a comprehensive, high-quality 
In the UK, Nottingham introduced an all-electric park-and-ride service and one of the biggest electric bus fleets in Europe, while Birmingham promotes a “bicycle revolution”, offering free bikes, cycle training and maintenance lessons. Freiburg in Germany coordinated transport and land use to increase journeys by bike threefold, double public transport use, and cut the share of trips by car to less than one third.
But how could the UK government deliver a meaningful right to clean air? There could be a nationwide duty on all public bodies to take into account the impact of air pollution and climate change whenever they make a decision about public services or public funds. A precedent exists in the form of the public sector equality duty, which assesses whether the decisions of public bodies will have a discriminatory impact on vulnerable groups, and if so take reasonable steps to prevent discrimination. It is now embedded in almost every public body decision-making process.
We urgently need to change how we live, work and run the economy, to stop avoidable, premature deaths, tackle climate change and advance visions of a world in which the air is fit to breathe. Today’s awareness-raising Smog Day is a step in the right direction.
 Andrew Simms is an author, analyst and campaigner