The 
The country’s transport minister, Andreas Scheuer, 
Scheuer’s claim that “increasing voices” in Germany’s medical profession were casting doubt on the science behind clean air benchmarks provoked a strong response from the EU environment commissioner, Karmenu Vella, who said if the limits were changed they would 
The dispute followed an open letter 
Prof Dieter Köhler, the paper’s author – and a former president of Germany’s Federal Association of Pulmonologists, Sleep and Respiratory Doctors (BdP) – is in Brussels for talks with senior EU environment over the issue, even though the BdP has 
The WHO’s climate and health team leader, Diarmid Campbell-Lendrum, told the Guardian the German material published so far should not be considered as a basis for discussion.
“We need evidence to be published in a peer-reviewed journal and properly reviewed by experts,” he said. “We have heard the discussion but we’ve seen nothing that constitutes evidence, from our point of view. And we have guidelines that are based on thousands of scientific papers and drawn up by the world’s best possible experts.”
Germany is one of several countries, including the UK, 
The EU’s environment wing views the underlying science of Scheuer’s claims as suspect. Officials believe the medics’ open letter contains no new data and say its signatories 
One EU source stressed that Tuesday’s meeting would not be allowed to influence a nearly completed 
“If his visit is merely a coincidence, it’s a remarkable one,” the source said, noting the German government’s recent loss of 16 domestic air pollution court cases. “There was no debate on NO
Köhler will be appearing at meetings in Brussels with German conservative MEPs, including Peter Liese, a right-leaning member of the European parliament’s environment committee.
Liese said he had wanted to help Köhler, whom he had known for years. “I don’t say he is right but he has important points to make and and I want responsible people in Brussels to listen,” he said. “When we want to maintain support for EU environmental policy, we need to react to legitimate criticism.”