hy are jeans so controversial? Is it the estimated 
“The denim industry is at a pivotal moment,” says Roian Atwood, senior director of global sustainable business at Kontoor Brands, which owns Wrangler and Lee, when we met at ART (Alter Repair Transform), a denim upcycling and mending workshop at the Copenhagen international fashion fair (CIFF) last month. Lee are among the 30 brands contributing to the 
The industry is working hard to make itself cleaner and more sustainable, investing in new technology such as the innovative dry foam to dye 
There is still a long way to go. According to Atwood, there is “a new and emerging environmental issue we are not quite ready to talk about yet, which is that denim has become integrated with a lot of synthetics. The comfort and the stretch movement, athleisure and the omnipresence of the yoga pant have given rise to a lot more stretch in denim. It’s plastic,” he says. And as such, your skinny jeans are responsible for shedding microplastics.
Appropriately enough, we meet in the “confessional booth” designed for visitors to confess their fashion sins and record them for a podcast. “If we are confessing our sins, I am here to say I like to wear light jeans,” he says. “A dark pair of denim uses less water in the wash-down process.” The lighter the denim, the more washing processes it has been through and the more water it has used.
The designer Duran Lantink, who was commissioned to work with Lee’s deadstock to create a small collection of upcycled denim, wears jeans every day (he switches between two vintage pairs) but is aware of the issues. “I think that, by buying a pre-washed jean, it is ruin in reverse,” he says. “I don’t get that.”
Lantink is part of a growing band of designers who are not just concerned about the environmental impact of the industry but also its waste. Bethany Williams, who has perfected the art of unpicking and upcycling unwanted jeans, has grown a cult following. Brands such as E.L.V. Denim (short for East London Vintage), which is sold at a range of stockists including Net-a-Porter, are building healthy businesses using secondhand denim as their raw material. “There are more jeans than people in the world,” says founder Anna Foster. At her studio and showroom, clients can choose from off-the-peg or custom-made jeans, ingeniously spliced together a few miles away at the Blackhorse Lane Ateliers in Walthamstow. 
But slowing down production is not on the agenda for the big denim brands, who would prefer to cut their environmental impact by reducing water and chemical consumption while continuing to produce at the same levels. However, there are some smart and potentially highly disruptive initiatives coming from smaller independents. Netherlands-based 
Whether you are a denim aficionado or a student on a budget, you can find jeans to suit your budget and your style if you shop secondhand.
Raw denim hasn’t been washed and treated multiple times. This is what denim used to look like before we started to sandblast, bleach and rip it to make it look old. Buy a pair of unwashed jeans and let them age with you.
Let leggings be leggings and jeans be jeans. One hundred per cent means the denim in your jeans can eventually be recycled.
If you are buying new, check the fabric composition. You might want to do some research online first. Look for recycled cotton, 
One of the biggest sources of water impact and energy use is during the consumer use phase. Roian Atwood advises a cold wash. Hiut Denim has a 
A good pair of jeans can last for decades if you look after them and repair them. Ask your denim brand where you can have your jeans repaired. Levi’s has a number of