Campaigners have called for free bus travel and the reopening of hundreds of miles of railway lines to end reliance on cars, as transport is due to be confirmed as the UK’s largest contributor to greenhouse gases.
Official data released on Tuesday is expected to confirm transport as the most polluting sector, largely driven by cars. It outstripped energy for the first time in 2016, with annual emissions of about 125m tonnes of CO
Friends of the Earth said there needed to be a “radical reimagining of transport” to bring about a 20% reduction in car journeys, even with a faster switch to electric cars, to meet climate change targets.
The group said free bus travel, costing £3bn a year, would also help address public health concerns around air quality and obesity.
Mike Childs, the head of research at Friends of the Earth, said the outlay was a fraction of road spending. He said: “Dozens of cities across the world offer some form of free public transport.
“What we are seeing instead is bus fares rising 75% over the last 15 years and over 3,300 services reduced or removed since 2010 in England and Wales.”
Lynn Sloman, the director of the Transport for Quality of Life consultancy, said: “
Labour said it was committed to re-regulation of buses and would provide free bus travel for under-25s, where services were under public control.
A Department for 
“We also support bus travel through £250m every year, as well as a further £1bn for the free bus pass scheme, paving the way to a more sustainable future.”
The DfT has awarded more than £6m to build hundreds of rapid chargepoints across Britain to support ultra-low emission taxis.
Meanwhile, the Campaign for Better Transport has called on the government to reopen dozens of rail lines around Britain to reach the most disconnected and disadvantaged communities.‏
The group has 
Darren Shirley, the Campaign for Better Transport’s chief executive, said: “The government should invest in a nationally led programme of expansion of the railway to help disadvantaged communities and tackle regional inequalities; reduce carbon emissions and air pollution; and create better and healthier places to live.”
Examples of lines identified as a priority include linking Wisbech, a relatively deprived town in Cambridgeshire, to jobs and training centres; converting a freight-only line in Hampshire serving towns into Southampton; and connecting towns in Northumberland to the Tyne and Wear Metro.‏
The RMT union backed the call. Its general secretary, Mick Cash, said:‏ “For years politicians have been talking up the benefits of reopening lines but few reach construction due to a lack of a national approach and public investment.”‏
A DfT spokesperson said: “We have received a wide variety of proposals to enhance the railway from across the public and private sector, and are working with promoters to explore opportunities to reopen routes cut under Beeching.”
In 2017, the government called for