his April will see the start of what the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, proclaims will be the toughest emissions standards for vehicles in any world city. Will it be a historic turning point in the battle against filthy air in our cities – or will it prompt “yellow vest” style protests from furious drivers?
Many motorists are unaware of how strict – and expensive – the new rules are for the ultra-low emission zone (ULEZ), which starts on 8 April this year. Diesel cars manufactured before 2015 are likely to fall foul of the rules, as well as most pre-2006 petrol cars. They will be charged £12.50 to come into central London at any time, on top of the £11.50 congestion charge, which operates from Monday to Friday 7am to 6pm.
Then from October 2021 the zone will be hugely expanded, with mums and dads on the school run potentially affected, as 3.6 million London residents are brought into the scheme. Any cars failing to meet the standards by then will have to pay £12.50 a day if they are driven anywhere in an area bounded by the city’s north and south circular roads.
Precisely how many drivers will be hit with the charge are unknown, as many are likely to sell older vehicles before 2021. 
It says: “When the zone expands to the north and south circular in 2021 we estimate that 80% of car kilometres driven within the zone, on an average day, would be by cars that already meet the ULEZ standard.” It adds that 90% of motorcycles are likely to be compliant by 2021.
But that still leaves at least 100,000 cars or more paying the charge – which critics are calling a new “poll tax” on Londoners that they claim will rake in as much as £750m to £1.5bn from hard-pressed motorists. But TfL says the expected impact will be much less – it projects that in 2019-20, the first year of the ULEZ, revenue will be £174m and costs £47m, producing a surplus of £127m.
In 2021, when the greatly expanded zone comes into force, TfL is projecting annual revenue to jump to £222m, but costs will also rise as a new generation of enforcement cameras are installed. It estimates costs in 2021-22 will be £125m, so the surplus will fall to £97m.
The battle to bring healthy air to city residents is not just in London. In 2020 
The idea behind London’s ULEZ is a determination to clean up the city’s filthy air – widely regarded as the dirtiest of any major city in Europe. At least 360 primary schools in the capital are in areas exceeding safe legal pollution levels, half of which comes from cars, lorries and buses.
TfL expects that after just the first year of the ULEZ, harmful nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions in central London will reduce by 45%, and 40% in the surrounding areas. It says: “The expansion of the ULEZ to the north and south circulars will deliver a further 20% reduction across London. This is the next step in the mayor of London’s ultimate goal of creating a zero emissions from road transport by 2050.”
But expansion of the zone to cover far greater parts of London, and the speed of its implementation, has provoked a fierce backlash from some. An analysis of submissions to the 
Thousands signed an open letter from the Healthy Air campaign, which said: “I strongly welcome the mayor’s commitment to tackling London’s illegal and harmful levels of air pollution. Road transport is a major source of air pollution and we need urgent action to tackle this.”
Friends of the Earth went further, calling for a bigger ULEZ, and sooner. It said: “The ULEZ must come into force much sooner than planned – by the end of 2018 at the latest. Londoners shouldn’t have to wait until 2021 for cleaner air. The zone must cover the whole of London to make a difference, extending beyond the north and south circular roads and including all of outer London too.”
But there are numerous opponents, such as the Alliance of British Drivers and motorbike groups – and even the Musician’s Union. The Motorcycle Action Group said: “Will the mayor compensate the thousands of low-paid workers using small, older motorbikes because it’s all they can afford, and what scheme will he be setting up to pay the difference in cost between cheap, older bikes and expensive public transport?”