Barely a month ago, Republican Rick Scott held a clear lead in the race to become Florida’s next US senator. Now a tidal wave of toxic algae threatens to engulf the campaign of the outgoing state governor, whom critics have dubbed ‘Red Tide Rick’.
Wildlife officials confirmed on Thursday that the same deadly algae bloom that 
The arrival in the busy waters off Miami-Dade, Broward and Palm Beach counties of the 
His detractors, including the incumbent Democratic senator Bill Nelson, have pounced on Scott for years of rolling back environmental protections and 
Nor is red tide the only problem. Outbreaks of blue-green algae are still choking many of Florida’s inland waterways to 
Meanwhile Scott, who once reportedly 
“You see the result,” Nelson said of his rival at a fiery debate in Miami this week. “He has systematically in his eight years as governor disassembled the environmental agencies of this state. He has drained the water management districts of funding. He even abolished the department of community affairs, which was the growth management agency.
“All of this results in more pollution in the water supply, in the lakes, streams and rivers. We’re seeing all the dead fish and wildlife that are on the beaches.”
Scott hit back by accusing Nelson of promising and failing to secure federal money for urgent repairs to the ageing Lake Okeechobee dyke that he said was crucial to protecting Florida’s water supply.
Miami-Dade officials closed several beaches to the public on Thursday as the Florida fish and wildlife conservation commission (FWC) reported low to moderate levels of the red tide organism at 
On Monday the agency began receiving anecdotal reports of beachgoers in Palm Beach and St Lucie counties suffering from respiratory distress, eye and throat irritations. Red tide has been recorded off Florida’s east coast only eight times in 65 years after traveling the current from the Gulf of Mexico, but never before in Miami-Dade or Broward counties.
Clean water for Florida has become an increasingly prominent campaign issue in recent weeks, with Nelson’s supporters accusing Scott of being an “election-year environmentalist”. They question his finding 
Scott’s spokeswoman, Lauren Schenone, however, insisted he had a proven environmental record. “Under Governor Scott’s leadership, Florida established the most comprehensive nutrient pollution standards in the nation and, last year, the 
But the Democratic state representative Kionne McGhee, whose district fronts Biscayne Bay, said Scott’s tenure in Tallahassee, and Republican control of the state legislature, had made things worse.
“For the past 20 years of controlling Florida’s air, the land and the environment, they’ve reduced the standards by which the DEP operates. The record speaks for itself,” he said.