. The Tories at their conference gleefully challenged Labour leaders to denounce “illegal” action, assuming the Communication Workers’ Union ballot would never jump the hurdle of Tory laws designed to make strikes virtually impossible. Tough: not only did turnout far outleap the legal minimum, but 89% of votes backed a walkout.
Lord Tebbit, union-baiter in chief, could only harrumph. “They are pricing themselves out of business, making it more difficult for themselves to keep their jobs,” he said, calling them “near-suicidal”.
He has a point. They are pricing themselves out of the market, as 
Recent employment tribunals against 
In a 
This is the working world Royal Mail is supposed to compete with. Moya Greene, CEO of Royal Mail, has condemned the use of 
There are some wonderful things that we take for granted: water from a tap, light from a switch – and the universal post. Every day except Sunday, from the remotest Scottish bothy to the isles of Scilly, a postman Pat delivers to every door. In the late 19th century, the service was so brilliant that there were between six and 12 mail deliveries a day in London: diaries and biographies are full of exchanges of letters almost as rapid-fire as emails. The deliberate dismantling and dismembering of the postal service stands as an emblem of the attack on so much of the public realm.
How perverse that we have a long-established network of national mail centres and delivery offices (many of them now closing), with a daily delivery to every home, and yet new swarms of vans and cars are crisscrossing the country to the same neighbourhoods, delivering items many times a day. The cost in air pollution and traffic congestion hasn’t been tallied, as TfL told me. Who really needs an 
Meanwhile, a 
This strike is a stand against all employees being dragged down by market forces to the pay and conditions of the worst. A race to the bottom is inevitable if bad employers are allowed to make huge profits by undercutting the good.
 Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist