ere’s the dismal new routine of life in inner-city 
Today though, I step outside and take a (shallow) breath. Not too bad. In our tiny courtyard the smoke is not actually visible right now, but it still takes a few little forays, stepping back indoors and out again, to determine whether the smell is worse inside the house or out. This morning, outside seems marginally better, so it’s time to move through the house, opening all the windows and doors, turning the ceiling fans up high. With luck we’ll get a bit of “fresh” air throughout in the next hour or so, before the smoke returns.
Next, I check the wet laundry waiting in the basket – it smells mouldy now after a couple of days, so I shove it back in the machine for another wash. Maybe today we’ll be able to hang it outside. But even then we’ll likely have to wash it again anyway. The smell seems impossible to banish.
As I open our windows this morning, the birds are squawking like crazy in the eucalypts beyond our fence – another good sign. On the worst days there’s a menacing quiet. But I can still taste smoke in the back of my mouth, and the heaviness in my lungs remains. In recent years I’ve largely grown out of my lifelong asthma, using medication only once or twice a month. Now I’m using my reliever several times a day. The health department 
I feel as though I’ve lost my ability to taste or smell anything but smoke. And oddly it doesn’t even seem to smell like smoke anymore; just an acrid, chemical, horrible odour in my clothes, my hair, the sofa, the pillows. One morning I dress in clean clothes and walk 300 metres to the shopping mall across the road from my house. The pharmacy, where I’m buying a new Ventolin, is deep inside, away from the entrance. But still the cashier wrinkles her nose. “I can smell it on you,” she says.
A Blue Mountains pal receives messages from concerned friends in the city. Her family lives 6km from one of the 150 fires burning throughout the state. Later we learn this fire has taken out 
We’re used to turning our attention briefly to 'those poor people' affected by climate change, then returning to normal life. Now those poor people include us
On one of the worst days, a friend tells me, Manly was filled with the noise of sirens as city fire trucks attended false emergencies: smoke alarms in houses and businesses were going off all day. Another friend swims daily at an eastern suburbs harbour beach famous for its crystal-clear water. Now she gets out of the water to find her skin flecked with fine ash.
We Sydneysiders are learning strange new symbols and language. Our weather apps now carry dotted lines across the shining sun: smoke haze. We learn the meaning of “temperature inversion”, in which warm air traps cool – and smoke – beneath it; our weather reports now carry air quality ratings. For the past month they’ve ranged from “poor” to well beyond “hazardous”. In news updates about the fires, it’s now commonplace to hear two horrific phrases: “seek shelter” and “too late to leave”.
In the inner city, 
Facebook chatter shifts from amused sightings of masks to suggestions of where to buy them, to resignation: they don’t work anyway. They might help your mood, but they’ll do nothing to stop the microscopic particles entering your lungs, 
The fire danger warnings have a new category. Colours at the low-danger end are green, moving through yellow and orange. The new one is a deep, malevolent red with black stripes, and it’s called “catastrophic”.
On the first catastrophic warning day there’s a palpable fear, because even expert firefighters 
At first we watch the footage – those walls of orange flame storeys high – with our hands over our mouths. Money floods in to 
Internet fights break out over whether it’s obscene to complain about the smoke. Of course it is; we’re lucky, we of the middle-class inner city. I can afford to buy a new Ventolin once a week, for example. I have 
But also: it 
After our petulance comes a stoic, patient reasoning. It’s good for us to get this wake-up call. And it’ll be over soon. But that was weeks ago, and the patience has been replaced by a grim, creeping dread. A fear that it won’t be over soon, or ever. It feels like karma. This is what the scientists have warned us about, 
We have the “Fires Near Me” app on our phones now, but I’m careful not to zoom out too far from our immediate 50km zone. If you do, it’s easy to panic. There are so many little fire symbols they overlap. Weeks after they began, almost half are still classed “out of control”. And zooming out brings the existential horror of what all this really means. It also brings shame, at how we city dwellers have managed to ignore what people in the regions have endured for years now. Even as we’ve written the letters, donated the money and attended the protests about the towns without water, the 
I speak with a psychologist friend who lives in the far west of 
A few days ago, on the worst day here, I lay on my bed in the afternoon. My lung cobwebs felt specially heavy, the sinus headache intense. Outside, despite daylight saving time, it was almost dark at 4pm. I’d taken to putting towels to the gap under the front door. My thoughts turned again, with fury, to our country’s leadership vacuum. The prime minister’s family lives here in Sydney; surely by now the man must be saying 
Outside parliament in Canberra, 
Back here in the Marrickville morning, it’s nine o’clock and the birds are growing quiet again. The smell is back. It’s astonishing how quickly it arrives; you sense it first in the back of the throat. I move through the house once more, closing all the doors and windows tight.