took this shot in a big open field near my home in Boston, Massachusetts. It was Midsummer and the sky was perfectly clear – or as clear as it gets near cities these days. Light pollution is changing how we see the stars and not for the better.
I work on a large-format, 8x10 camera. It isn’t electronic, just a big black box with film in it. It’s a slow process so I can be out until three or four in the morning. It takes time to set up all of my gear and some images can take an hour to fully expose. It’s time-consuming, but that’s part of the joy: standing alone in nature staring at the sky is what I’d spend my time doing anyway, so why not make a photo of it?
It was the colour of this shot that grabbed me. Blue is the colour of the void, whether it’s the deep sea or the deep sky. It also speaks to the mystery of space and nature: the idea that this starlight we see every night is millions of years old, and has travelled such unimaginable distances, is something I’ll never get over.
I’m not a scientist by any means, but I’ve always taken a general interest in scientific developments, ever since childhood. Only when I started to research the history of photography did I realise how space has always interested photographers, and how it helped to found the discipline.
All of those early types of photography – 
Galileo was one of the first to use a telescope to map the cosmos. This is a homage to him
One of my greatest inspirations in pursuing space photography was 
There’s also a personal reason for my love of the night sky: my childhood. My father loved watching light travel across the landscape. I think it was his sense of wonder that inspired me. Taking long walks together became an important bonding experience for us, being alone with each other underneath the night sky.
I suppose my work is quite unusual. In a world of instant images, it’s strange to shoot on such a clunky old camera. I wouldn’t say I’m reacting against the speed or instantaneity of today’s photographic world, it’s just what I’ve always done and what I’ll continue doing.
It’s getting harder to take these images. 
But it’s also a shame for humanity. The feeling of staring at the vastness of 
 Cleveland, Ohio, 1953.
 MFA at Rochester Institute of Technology.
, 
: “Each day photographing.”
 “I don’t have any.”
 “Make pictures, read a lot and go where that takes you.”