new UN report is set to reveal that 
We are triggering a mass extinction event, and critically we cannot separate one environmental crisis from another. 
The IPBES report reveals that 
The connections between these crises make solutions seem all too dauntingly difficult. But in fact, a solution to one problem will inevitably make a positive impact on many others too. More than 
 taking land out of meat production and rewilding it. This will boost biodiversity enormously but will also tackle global warming because those rewilded, rewetted lands will capture significantly more carbon. If these lands are also opened up for us to enjoy, our physical and mental health will flourish. Thus we repair the ecology of destruction.
It can be difficult to know what we can do as individuals – but at least we all possess an increasingly sophisticated understanding of how farming, consumption and energy-use impacts upon the planet, hence the growth of the 
If I make a change, it’s me. If both of us do, it’s we. That’s how things grow. The 
And we’ve seen the success of 
The human species is remarkably inventive and adaptable but it is simply no good at change. When we are presented with good evidence to change our minds, we resist it. For many farmers, change is coming, whether they accept it or not. Intensive livestock farming has been found out on many accounts. If I was a livestock farmer today and I wasn’t producing high-welfare, low-intensity, high-quality meat like 
I’m not saying every farmer can follow 
But we can’t just put the pressure on farmers, we need to act ourselves. So those of us who live in cities and suburbs should pressurise the government to introduce mandatory changes immediately to vastly improve urban biodiversity and air quality. My 
We’re not struggling to find ideas to solve problems either globally or locally. It’s action we’re lacking, in government and beyond, as individuals and together as a species. If we act now we may be surprised at how these seemingly vast problems diminish quicker than we imagine.
 Chris Packham is a naturalist, nature photographer and author, and one of the presenters of BBC2’s Springwatch