hen we weren’t concentrating, Britain’s 
I lived in Whitechapel in east London for 10 years, above the notorious 
While whole thinktanks had been set up to document the state of the UK, collecting the diverse ephemera of our time to bury in time capsules beneath churchyards, nobody guessed that the UK was already hard at work on its own. A time capsule containing everything we wanted to forget – the time capsule behind the time capsule. No delightful drawings by four-year-olds, no bottles of wine or photographs of smiling teams shaking hands – instead, the night-time nappies of those four-year-olds, the sticky vomit induced by wine, the hand sanitising wipes used by the smiling team after they realised Pippa had the norovirus.
What did we think toilets were? Private shredders? Ceramic mouths ready to chew up anything we wanted to forget?
Nappies! Some of us have been throwing nappies down the toilet! Which, Lord, would take some serious effort, no? These people must have really wanted to get those nappies down those toilets, must have got the toilet brush out of its little germ bath and really shoved it down there, flushing, flushing as they pushed. “Back to your family, sweet child, go home,” flush. But good. It’s good they flushed nappies down the loo. Because it’s exposed the real face of Britain – the mucky dum-dum plonker behind our mask of grown-up serenity has been revealed.
What did we think toilets were? Private shredders? Ceramic mouths ready to chew up anything we wanted to forget? Plumbed-in pervert Cookie Monsters? Not so. It turns out toilets are artists that have been filing away all our disasters in order to create a portrait that reveals more about British people than any census, any referendum. One of those photographic mosaics that at first glance appears to be a picture of us, all of us, grinning and weary, but on closer inspection is a montage of hundreds and thousands of images of the things we’ve flushed away.
In 2005, it was decided that adults couldn’t wipe their bums properly, so “moistened adult wipes” arrived (“flushable”, in that anything you can fit down a toilet is flushable) becoming a £12.4bn business. And while we could have guessed that these would be down there – the packaging practically begs us to toss them down the loo; there are theses to be written about the word “disposable” – the most surprising thing we’ve learned about ourselves by dissecting the fatberg is the breadth of our vanity. Twenty years ago perhaps, the powder we’d have predicted to have found washing through our sewers might have been cocaine. But that moneyed hedonism has dissolved to make way for a more complicated kind of ambition, an aimless body building that leads some to illegal muscle-enhancing drugs, gallons of which now wash through Britain’s pipes. The disappointment of finding out not just that we’re disgusting, but that we’re arrogant, too.
We get the celebrities we deserve and we have truly earned the fatberg, today’s antihero, profiled across the globe with glowing 
, an Artangel performance where professional mourners from across the world wailed and sang for the dead. When I emerged to street level, I felt a sort of tragedy – not simply thinking about loss, but because it became clear how lacking our British ceremonies around death are – subdued and stilted, rather than the visceral outpouring witnessed here. There is something to be said about going beyond words.
My favourite story this week came in the form of a Twitter thread by 22-year-old 
I love