re you still reeling from yesterday’s shock revelation that the government has done 
Away from Westminster, every anxious industry and professional body is scenario-planning for worst and least-worst outcomes. But it’s not easy when the cabinet, in 18 long months since the referendum vote, has never discussed the destination it is hurtling towards.
Today is the turn of the environmental health officers (EHOs) to peer into the fog of possible 
EHOs are one of the great invisible anchors of civilisation, the inspectors and guarantors of standards we have taken for granted all our lives. They rightly fear those standards are in grave peril. They warn that abandoning EU rules and relying on the World Trade Organisation will entail “acceptance by the UK consumer of food that doesn’t meet quality, composition, hygiene or standards of production” relied on for years.
Already their work has been sabotaged by austerity. Councils hit by 40% funding cuts have shed a third of their EHOs: England now has half as many as Wales and Northern Ireland. Inspections of food outlets have been severely cut back, along with checking for food fraud, air quality, landlords letting out high-risk properties, septic tattoo parlours, rats, cockroaches, animal and bee welfare, pesticides, bad antibiotics, noise, fumes and risks of every kind. The protective covering between us and dangerous filth is growing perilously thin.
Researching 
In one transport cafe, I saw them find meat pies lying on the kitchen floor, out of the fridge, labelled “organic”, with no known origin, delivered for cash off the back of a lorry. Just as air quality reaches crisis levels, two-thirds of their air monitoring stations were shut because of lack of staff.
The Chartered Institute of Environmental 
Public health laboratories are stretched to breaking point. Where will extra inspectors come from, with many fewer trainees now? Besides, many inspectors are EU nationals who may not stay.
They listen to the drumbeat of the deregulators with growing trepidation. “If we could just halve the burdens of the EU social and employment legislation we could deliver a £4.3bn boost to our economy and 60,000 new jobs,” the former international development secretary 
 the reason for our low growth is “because we’ve got too much regulation, too much stuff coming from Brussels”. The same chorus has come from Jacob Rees-Mogg, Chris Grayling, Dominic Raab and the rest.
The health and safety system already conducts dramatically fewer workplace inspections: inspectors can no longer pro-actively inspect, without an accident or complaint. That’s the triumph of decades of mockery of the “’elf and safety culture”, which the EHOs suffer too.
No, it’s not true that they banned conkers, hanging baskets, candy-floss on sticks or flip-flops at work, or made trapeze artists wear hard hats. But those tales stick in the mind, like the lies Brexiteers peddled for decades against Brussels: straight bananas and fishermen in hair nets. As Trump shows, fake news campaigning scores so much better than dull facts. 
Away from the Westminster impasse over the interpretation of “alignment” versus “harmonisation”, those words have real-world effects touching every aspect of British life. Yet the meaning is deliberately ignored in the Brexit press, hidden from too many voters. No wonder Davis never called for impact assessments, knowing how grim they would be.
 Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist