“Do you know what is going on here today?” I ask Annette, the banana seller I’m buying a quick breakfast from. She doesn’t, so I explain that people are gathering here to ride bicycles together. We’re standing on Luwum street in central Kampala, looking out at a completely alien scene. With the usual sea of cars, minibus taxis and 
It is a playground in the middle of a city where people rarely stop to play; there is too much work to be done. “I don’t know how to ride a bicycle, but I’d like to learn,” says Annette as she observes the scene, sighing: “But how can I learn? Are you going to teach me?”
People are gathering for Uganda’s 
This Critical Mass was actually enabled by traffic police under the direction of 
Uganda is among the 
According to Peter Kaujju, a KCCA spokesperson, the area from Luwum Street to Namirembe Road will serve as a pilot non-motorised transport zone, with works on the two billion Uganda shilling (£390,000) project expected to begin this February. “And as a matter of practice, all roads being rebuilt in the city have the carriage way, cycle lanes and pedestrian walkways as well,” adds Kaujju. Whether construction gets under way quickly is another matter: while there are painted cycle lanes in a few parts of the city, they are not the separated lanes Guardian Cities 
But how did Critical Mass, a direct action that often sees cyclists in cities such as London set off multicoloured smoke bombs and enforce huge roadblocks in the face of angry motorists, end up being endorsed by the Ugandan authorities? “The idea came from us following a similar Critical Mass 
At around 10am the cyclists set off (not before a suited big dog from KCCA hops on a bike at the front for a photo op), first to pick up other participants from 
Ivan Watenya, a passerby, asks what’s going on. “It’s very difficult to ride in this city,” he tells me. “And yet, for an environment which should be free of pollution, we need areas where we can ride easily. I would cycle if it was safe – it would increase my fitness too.”
But where there is change, there is always opposition – something those pushing urban development initiatives are all too aware of. Judith Owigar points out people’s reactions to Placemaking Week on Luwum Street, where pictures of KCCA’s urban development plans for the area are exhibited – a move she says makes the authority more accountable to the public.
“For many people, it’s really surprising that the KCCA is thinking of something like this. They have been asking: is this going to actually happen? Are there really going to be green lanes for bicycles? – it’s such a strange concept for people,” she says.
Is it a case of too much, too soon? Many Kampalans may feel they have more pressing causes to fight for than cyclist rights – be they 
Local businessman Kubo Barabye, 55, is cynical. “This won’t work here. They are spending money putting this green paint on the road, but 
Barabye is among a community of business people in the pilot non-motorised transport zone who are concerned that a reduction in the number of cars will mean a reduction in profits. It is a common perception in Kampala that people who travel by foot or bicycle are poor. “We don’t know how this cycling will affect our business,” one owner of a clothing shop told me. “I don’t understand why they are promoting bicycles … yes, I can cycle. But people have so many problems here, so we don’t think about such things.”
The glossy plans, free T-shirts, hi-vis and speeches from suited officials at the event do seem a world away from the lives of most people here. And trust in the government and city authority is low. “They just care about receiving money and presenting an image that they are doing something, yet they are not doing anything. It’s for their own benefit,” argues bag seller Robert Kisitu, 24. “Do you know why they are promoting bicycles? It will be because a politician or his family member is importing bikes to sell here. They are creating jobs for themselves, not us. And later, after their personal motives have been achieved, they won’t bother about bicycles any more.”
Whether there is anything in these suspicions or not, it’s clear that many remain unconvinced by the initiative. And it is easy to see why, amid their daily struggle, local people don’t see the value of Critical Mass or the construction of cycle lanes. I speak to Edwin Barungi, 26, after he’s finished the ride. “I cycle every week, but considering what 
Only time will tell whether the KCCA succeeds in making Kampala a safer, less-polluted, more