Residents are preparing a legal challenge to the redevelopment of a former gasworks in Southall, west London. The move follows two years of complaints to Ealing council, developers the 
“The campaign group has become increasingly frustrated by the abject failure of Berkeley adequately to respond to legitimate grievances,” said Jo Sidhu QC. “We now have no choice but to instigate legal action to hold them accountable for the damage they have done to the health of local residents. People are suffering serious and chronic illnesses relating to the toxic pollution released by the land being used by the developers.”
He added: “This is an immediate and urgent public health crisis and we are determined to pursue every legal route to stop the building works and to seek substantial compensation for injury to those who continue to suffer.
“Public nuisance is both a criminal offence and a civil action in tort. It also involves substantial breaches of environmental law.”
Sidhu, who grew up in Southall, said that in preparation for legal proceedings campaigners who lived near the site were collecting data on respiratory problems, chest pains and other symptoms reported since work began on the Southall Waterside development in early 2017. The 
Dr Onkar Sahota, a local GP and a member of the 
The site has multiple regulators: it is up to the 
A PHE spokesperson said
The PHE 
On Wednesday residents will put their concerns to the Environment Agency, Ealing council, Berkeley and PHE at a public meeting. “We will demand that there is independent air quality monitoring of the site and steps to reduce naphthalene levels,” said Angela Fonso, from the local campaign group. She said they would also demand the removal of a Berkeley site construction manager as governor at a primary school on the edge of the site.
A spokesperson for Berkeley said: “This is a highly regulated activity and all work has been closely monitored by the authorities including Ealing council and the Environment Agency. Any legal challenge will be vigorously opposed.”
Controversy has dogged Southall Waterside, one of the most ambitious brownfield developments under way in the UK, since 
Sidhu attended the hearing after Berkeley appealed. He presented findings to show potential damage to health: “Yet the then mayor simply smirked throughout the hearing with barely an acknowledgement of the seriousness of the situation.”