he modern world is too loud. Noise pollution wreaks havoc on the behavioral patterns and stress levels of wildlife. Ecosystems shift in the wake of chronic noise: seed dispersers, pollinators and their predators avoid the clamor, thus changing the landscape of plants and trees. And, as 
The takeaway? We are literally killing ourselves with noise.
Yet, while we talk a lot about 
Here are several ideas on how to minimize your noise footprint:
Garret Keizer, author of The Unwanted Sound of Everything We Want
Yet even people in rural or protected natural areas may notice the presence of distant 
After becoming more sensitive to the noise around you, try cutting back on your most raucous activities. Some of the loudest culprits are motorcycles and sports cars with ear-splitting exhausts. Other common noise offenders include recreational vehicles like snowmobiles, ATVs and motorboats. Even at 
Given the sonic disturbance to fish and birds, many parks across the US have banned gas-powered vehicles altogether. Even if they’re permitted in your area, however, consider switching to mellower forms of outdoor fun and transportation. Canoeing or kayaking get you out on to the water without harming or masking the natural acoustic environment. Biking instead of driving helps reduce traffic noise. And choosing an eco-friendly vehicle – as measured by decibel levels, as well as carbon emissions – is an effective way to minimize your noise footprint.
Of course, if you remain a diehard motor vehicle enthusiast despite the sound interference, please make sure to follow noise laws, keep your machine running smoothly, and don’t blast the radio.
Anyone who has been awakened by a power lawnmower, leaf blower, hedge trimmer, or snowblower knows that “quiet” suburban living is a myth. Tools used in lawn care are a surprisingly disruptive source of ambient noise. Unfortunately, human dwellers aren’t the only ones suffering the consequences – songbirds and other wildlife are also silenced or scared away by the clamor.
If physically possible, opt for a rake and shovel instead of a gas-powered machine. Also consider switching to an electric or manual lawnmower. Better yet, ditch the mower altogether and transform your grass lawn into a 
According to R Murray Schafer, author of The Soundscape: Our Sonic Environment and the Tuning of the World
The solution? Pipe down!
Furthermore, even if a noise isn’t as obviously disruptive as, say, shrieking and laughing teenagers, it can still be damaging. For instance, the constant drone of window air conditioners or exhaust fans may be causing your human 
Any truly effective strategy to reduce noise footprint must also contain an element of activism. As urban areas grow in population and noise pollution 
The 
It may seem overwhelming to try to fix what you can’t see, but go outside and sit awhile. Close your eyes. 
Paige Towers, a writer based in Milwaukee, is at work on a book about sound