he oceans, seemingly limitless, invoke in us a sense of awe and wonder…” says David Attenborough’s soothingly familiar voice over footage of icebergs and islands. “Plastic has become an integral part of our daily lives,” he continues, picking up rubbish from a beach, “but every year some 8 million tonnes of it ends up in the ocean.” Attenborough’s now-famous message has helped galvanise communities throughout the UK to cut down on single-use, avoidable plastics.
In July 2017 the environmental charity 
SAS began as a grassroots campaign against polluted seas in 1990. It’s partly thanks to its work that the UK has some of Europe’s cleanest waters. With nearly 99% of bathing water now exceeding minimum standards (compared with 27% in 1990), the charity has turned its attention to the problem of disposable plastics.
In December 2017, just as 
As well as helping the environment, these communities may be attracting more visitors too. Most residents (77%) responding to a poll in Pembrokeshire felt that local plastic-free initiatives had boosted tourism.
A growing number of tourists are looking for more sustainable options. Yates cites reports of overseas visitors seeing news coverage of Plastic Free Penzance and deciding to visit as a result. Penzance guesthouse owner Jon Matthews predicts: “Those businesses who fail to recognise the environmental concerns of a customer base … will lose more market share in the following years. It’s a chance to do the right thing and grow your business at the same time.”
Ahead of 
 On a wall near Whitstable’s busy High Street, street artist Catman has painted a mural of the earth in a giant egg-timer, trickling through into a heap of discarded bottles. 
Visitors browse the shops, buy shellfish in the harbourside market, watch the fishing boats unload, and often pop in on 
 The 
 Both cafes are part of the new 
 The first plastic-free town in its county, Lyme Regis is on 
The town’s old 
 Visitors can join in several plastic-free events, including beach cleans and film nights 
 More than 20 businesses, from the library to the brewery, have signed up to the local refill scheme, and several hotels have achieved SAS plastic-free status. One of the latest places to gain the award is 
 With tropical gardens, trendy art galleries, pirate-themed pubs and the magnificent 
 was one of the first plastic-free champions and only sells takeaway drinks in refill cups. Pop in for vegan nachos or roasted squash salad (each £10.95). 
 The midsummer 
 (doubles from £80 B&B), next to the subtropical 
 An old-school resort 15 miles from Hull, Hornsea has a world-apart feel, with fresh doughnut stands and 2p slot machines on the promenades, and traditional wooden rowing boats for hire (£5 adult, £2.50 child) on 
The town’s long-running free carnival is on 19-21 July and has a “back in time” theme for 2019, with the stated aim of avoiding single-use plastics. It also features a parade and community tug of war. Cyclists and walkers will also enjoy the Hornsea Rail Trail, which starts (or ends) in Hull, 15 miles away.
 None of the local hotels has gone plastic-free yet, but at the elegant 
 Keen paddleboarders in Hornsea’s plastic-free group organised a “rubbish paddle” in the nearby Driffield canal. They’ve also signed up 14 local businesses and work with the coastguard. A weekend base, in a beach hut on the north prom, welcomes visitors and has kit for litter-pickers with the local Tesco providing free hot drinks and biscuits afterwards. Coordinator Paul Parry says feedback from visitors has been “fantastic, with people saying it’s the cleanest beach they’ve been to”.
 This colourful old town, a Cinque Port in medieval times , has half-timbered inns and the ruins of one of William the Conqueror’s first English castles, and is working towards plastic-free status. Grab a proper Italian ice cream (in a cone not a tub) from 
The venerable 
 is promoting clean seas on 14 July and pirate-themed fun includes an attempt to break the world record for the largest number of people forming a human image of a boat. From 3-11 August, 
 Hotels in Hastings haven’t yet joined the plastic-free scheme, but visitors might try the Old Rectory, in a lovely part of town on East Hill, with locally sourced breakfasts, including smoked fish from down the road (doubles from £110 B&B, 
 With 43 miles of coastline, Jersey (not part of the UK) has plenty of incentive to rid the waters of rubbish. The island’s government declared a climate emergency in May 2019 and has been “super supportive” of 
 Local hotel group Seymours has led the way in terms of sustainability, removing or replacing most single-use plastics from its three hotels (including the 
 PFJ joined Surfers Against Sewage in January 2018 and has held regular beach cleans with charity Littlefeet Environmental. It has built recycling machines and run design competitions for students. With creative advocacy group 
 Between the ocean and the heights of Exmoor, North Devon is full of wildlife. From mossy oak woods to salt-swept purple heath, grassy dunes to rocky shore, horseshoe bats, fritillary butterflies, hedgehogs and water voles thrive alongside seals, otters, red deer and a huge range of birds.
The 
 For a place to stay with on-site environment-focused family activities, head for the fringes of Exmoor and one of the converted barns around 
A good alternative is to camp at 
 The firm sandy beaches are perfect for building castles, while a stroll along the coast path leads past ancient standing stones. These two villages, framed by low green hills and wooded valleys, were Pembrokeshire’s first SAS-accredited communities. At this year’s Pembrokeshire triathlon on 8 June, 
Try asparagus and Welsh leek risotto (£10.95) or vegan caponata siciliana (£12.95) at the 
Little Haven, a characterful old fishing village, also has some eco-foodie gems. Visitors can take the 
 To get closer to the ocean, hire body boards from 
 Famous as one end of Alfred Wainwright’s challenging 
, an old-fashioned beach cafe. serves tea (£1.70) in china cups and metal teaspoons. Staff will refill water bottles and there’s a cracking view of St Bees Head from the window.
 There are frequent beach cleans in the area, organised by 
 Accommodation options include 
 Anstruther’s characterful seafront in 
The town’s first plastic-free champion was 
 Among eco-friendly options, the Spindrift Guesthouse (doubles from £110 B&B,