n April, at a Net-a-Porter event where the online retailer’s trends for this autumn were presented, one of the most popular accessories was not a leather handbag by Gucci or a leopard-print, high-vamp shoe, but the black Net-a-Porter.com-branded “keep” cups that the coffee was served in. At least one fashion editor was witnessed shouldering her way over to the bar muttering: “I just need one of those cups!”
Fashion fans are followers and consumers. If something’s in, hip, hot or cool they will want it and they will buy it. And if it’s not, they won’t. So when 
In the lead up to 
Subscriptions issues of the magazine will be delivered this month in paper rather than its usual plastic packaging – and once the company has used up all its remaining stock of the latter, it will move to using paper packaging on a permanent basis. It’s part of a commitment that the company has made to rid itself of unnecessary plastic. Its fashion shoots are now plastic-free zones – no throwaway bottles, coffee cups or cutlery, and so is the office. “I can’t see a single plastic bottle on any desk in here,” says Yeomans, who is also global content director for Yoox Net-a-Porter group.
But it’s going to take more than a plastic bottle ban to counterbalance the part the fashion industry has played in what Erik Solheim, the UN environment chief, 
“We now know there is a real issue in the the shedding of microfibres during the wash cycle for synthetic fibres,” says Livia Firth, environmental campaigner and founder of the sustainability consultancy 
A really big job – particularly given that shiny, plastic-y look – vinyl, PVC and glossed up leather – is a 
Parley’s founder, Cyrill Gutsch, has said that designers and brands need to wean themselves off the “plastic drug”. The organisation advocates a policy of avoid, intercept, redesign: stop using virgin plastic; collect “ocean plastic” accumulated at the bottom of the sea; recycle it into new materials and textiles.
A number of established designers and brands are listening. Stella McCartney, who worked with Parley in 2016 to make ocean plastic trainers for Adidas, now uses recycled polyester and Econyl – a regenerated nylon made from industrial plastic, waste fabric and fishing nets – in certain accessories and outerwear, with a commitment to 
Last year, 
 of using plastic in its business only where it has “a clear and demonstrable benefit”. Those plastic covers on the 500,000 cashmere jumpers it is selling? They are coming off. This summer it has launched a recycled polyester packaway mac made with 50% recycled polyester, sourced from used plastic bottles. This is part of its sustainability plan, which commits to making at least 25% of clothing and home products from reused or recycled materials by 2025. 
But while these are all good moves, in terms of scale they are almost negligible. This year Adidas announced that it had sold 1m pairs of its ocean plastic trainers. Sounds great. Except that the company produced 403m pairs of trainers, according to 
“The challenge for the future is to create a world where brands make a product, consumers use it and then return it to the manufacturer to make another product,” says Giulio Bonazzi, CEO and president of Aquafil, a company that transforms plastic ocean and landfill waste into textiles. “For me this is not just about avoiding the use of plastic. There needs to be a fundamental shift in how we approach the design of products. We have to think about the end of life – what happens when the garment is finished with? If it is going to end up in landfill or filling our oceans then we should not be making it.”
Yeomans is happy to play her part in delivering a similar statement. “Aside from the practical issues, the messaging is one of the most important things that we can deliver,” she says. “As members of the fashion industry, I hope that with what we do this week and going forward, we can use our influence to establish that plastic is not fantastic.”
 This article was amended on 28 June 2018 to correct the spelling of Giulio Bonazzi’s last name from Onazzi.