he impacts of the climate crisis are now clearly manifesting in ways beyond rising temperatures. In Australia, the conditions for 
At the same time, Australia is pioneering the 
There is some interesting research around denialism. Researchers have essentially 
This phenomenon affects solutions, too. If a policy proposal to reduce emissions conflicts with someone’s pre-existing beliefs – if it requires more government intervention in markets, for example – they tend to 
Over the course of the past decade, Australia was a laboratory for this type of thinking. Research has 
Rightwing media outlets in Australia have responded to the current bushfires by either 
There is a trajectory for memes like this: the idea emerges in the fever swamps of denialist groups, it slowly seeps into fringe blogs, and from those blogs into Australia’s rightwing media. Then fringe political players take it up, and it’s consequently absorbed by leaders from major parties.
There is precedent for this phenomenon. In 2018, a 
The latest story doing the rounds is that the fires have been caused by arsonists or even climate activists – and it has been particularly potent. It is currently somewhere between the blogs and the rightwing media; I imagine that it’ll be in the papers – and on the lips of politicians – shortly.
In the 
It was 
Denialism comes directly from other leading Australian politicians. In 2013, this was more explicit, as when Tony Abbott said 
The prime minister, Scott Morrison, always teeters at the edges of this style of disaster denialism, using coded digs that suggest there is nothing unusual about what’s going on. “We have faced these disasters before” and “I know how distressing that [smoke haze] has been, particularly for young people who haven’t seen it before” both stand out as examples of Morrison’s strategy: disguise straightforward climate denialism with appeals to “common sense”, collective memory or the 
When he won the election in May 2019, Morrison declared it a victory for the “quiet Australians”. That may have been true, but there are far fewer quiet Australians left today, as hundreds of thousands have experienced the largest mass evacuation in the history of the country.
Still, anecdotal dispatches from Christmas dinner tables outline the success of rightwing memes in denying that Australia’s disaster is in any way related to the climate crisis. Morrison seals the deal, offering a comforting alternate reality that satisfies the craving to deny anything related to the climate crisis, whether it’s the science, the solutions or the impacts.
If it works, it’ll kick off another decade of sustained inaction in a country that has incredibly disproportionate influence on the world’s climate system. This time, we must nip it in the bud.
 Ketan Joshi is an Australian energy and climate science communicator