estminster city council’s decision to 
The pedestrianisation of Oxford Street, which Khan adopted as his policy after I suggested it at one of the hustings during the 
Moreover, there is the arrival in December of Crossrail, whose trains will bring up to 1,200 people into the street’s two stations, Tottenham Court Road and Bond Street, from a single train – and there will be up to 24 per hour in each direction.
Most cities in the world have learned that pedestrianised areas lead to an improved economy and a better environment and yet Westminster, a deeply reactionary Tory-led authority which makes tens of millions of pounds of profit from parking tickets and fines, insists London remain in the dark ages. Its Tory leader Nickie Aiken, who, astonishingly, revealed the council’s decision to block pedestrianisation on the very day House of Fraser announced it was 
Yes, two-thirds of local people objected to the closure, but only because they feared more traffic on their local streets, which is unlikely to happen since only the buses and taxis currently allowed in Oxford Street will be displaced. So the effects will be minimal. More importantly, two-thirds of Londoners overall supported the plan and the mayor must show that he represents them, not the few misinformed nimbys of Westminster.
Khan, quite rightly, condemned Westminster’s decision but that’s the easy bit. He seemed to make no commitment to pushing ahead with the scheme other than a vague pledge: “I won’t walk away from Oxford Street.” Neither has he set out any strategy about what action he could take. Westminster seems intent on stalling through yet more consultation, but the time for talking is over. Instead, Khan must show that he really believes in a policy that has widespread support across 
He could take lessons from his predecessor. Most of what Boris Johnson did as mayor was showboating, but his one success was the 
Gilligan was a genuine cycling proselytiser and campaigner; Khan, on the other hand, has appointed a cycling and walking commissioner, 
Khan must throw his natural caution to the wind and show Westminster he means business; he can do this by cutting off any funds going to the council since every borough gets an allocation from 
 Christian Wolmar is a writer and broadcaster specialising in transport