Fly out of 
To the untrained nose, Delhi’s air is a potent bouquet. High notes of charred biomass mingle with sulphurous remnants of Diwali bonfires, with base notes of subsidised diesel, burned plastic and coal.
I moved there in early 2017. To me, a relative outsider from south-east 
I was 
What is it like to live and love in a city that shoves two packs of cigarettes down your throat every day without your consent? How did Delhi get here?
Its geography doesn’t do it any favours. Delhi is a land-locked city-state of 29 million. In winter, low-speed winds bring dust from the Gulf and cold-air inversion keeps pollution close to the ground.
Delhi borders the wheat-bowl states of Uttar Pradesh, Punjab and Haryana, which were the laboratories for India’s green revolution – a revolution that rescued India from famine, but the city is now facing the fallout from 
Delhi also has 
The inertia around the capital’s killer air, however, owes a lot to a unique political deadlock.
Delhi is host to the Narendra Modi-led government, the Aam Aadmi party (AAP) at state level, and a municipality administered by Modi’s Bharatiya Janata party (BJP).
Ask for accountability and things get tricky. Crop-burning spans multiple state borders and ministries. Communication breakdowns have bordered on the ridiculous in recent years, with the state’s chief ministers trying to set up emergency meetings via 
In charge of Delhi is Arvind Kejriwal from the AAP. His “common man’s party” was formed on the back of a powerful, nationwide movement in 2013 that promised to clean up politics. AAP came to power in Delhi in January 2015 promising cheaper electricity, a transition to renewables, and an end to the city’s pollution and water woes. Months later, key environmentalists in AAP were 
In Kejriwal’s first winter as chief minister, he announced an odd-even traffic scheme as an emergency measure on a trial basis: drivers with odd-numbered plates could drive on odd days of the month and vice-versa. It was met with disbelief, valid questions of who it let off the hook and attempts to subvert it. Single-SUV households became double-SUV households to circumvent the ban. Studies show particulate matter levels did go down at choke points. But activists say 
Cut to a few weeks ago. The AAP government announces free public transport on the city’s buses for women, but this is dismissed as an election gimmick by the BJP. AAP rolls out odd-even again and a defiant BJP MP rides into the heart of the city in an odd-numbered car on an even-numbered day in protest. Delhi’s coal plants fail to meet emission standards that the BJP authored four years ago, but a BJP leader 
Which takes us to this week, when India’s supreme court ordered “the entire police machinery to ensure that not even a single incident takes place of [crop] burning henceforth”. The directive has brought temporary relief but is also deeply unsustainable and classist. What the highest court has done is force poor people, once again, to shoulder the burden of environmental accountability, while putting them at risk of punitive action.
It’s a pattern that environmental movements know well. The past five years have seen vicious reprisals against indigenous defenders, bright lives reduced to statistics in 
But urban climate movements are wising up. This week, Delhi mothers and sanitation workers stood together with banners screaming 
On the hallowed steps of Bangalore’s town hall, the city’s de facto protest site, I spotted hundreds of new faces at this September’s school strikes. “A for apple, B for ball, climate change will fuck us all!” screamed eighth-grader Greta-believers at their first ever protest.
Seven of the 10 most polluted cities in the world are 
 Aruna Chandrasekhar is an independent journalist from India. She is currently based at the University of Oxford’s Environmental Change Institute.