remember the dawning of my green consciousness: the sudden, painful realisation that products were tested on animals. This was in the early 1970s. I was about 10 years old. A teacher told me that baby powder was put into the eyes of cats and dogs to make sure it was safe. She also said that the plastic container would pollute the Earth.
A few years later, as punk sensibility captured my naturally rebellious heart, I immersed myself in the ecological fight. I joined Greenpeace. I wrote letters – even to the pope on his visit to Britain – arguing against the clubbing of baby seals in Canada. This passion has never left me.
Throw into the mix that I’ve been disabled since the age of 14, however, and environmentalism can start to get tricky. Over the years, I’ve had to learn that being green does not always sit comfortably with my access needs.
Take the 
This is why the news that Seattle has 
I’ve heard through my networks that straws may ​become 'a special medical item' for disabled people
I’ve been in this ecological battle for longer than many newcomers have been alive. I get uncomfortable and angry when I see non-disabled people behave as though they know the answer to this dilemma in exchanges that can get heated, if not abusive. Why do we need plastic straws? Won’t paper ones do? What about bamboo? Or glass? Metal? These questions are not easy to answer. Paper straws generally don’t do well in hot liquids and I’ve yet to find decent flexible ones. This is important to get the angle right for safe drinking, when you can’t hold a cup or even if another person holds it for you. Metal ones are often fat, better used for smoothies and not good if you have a biting issue. I tried silicone straws, which were too soft and fat to be reliably useful.
As for 
The irritating thing is that somehow disabled people are tainted as not caring about environmental issues. The truth, in my experience, is that many actually care more. Perhaps it’s because those of us who need these things navigate multiple obstacles and negative attitudes on a daily basis, and find ourselves forced to think about things differently. Then there are the health factors. I don’t actually want to use harmful 
Disabled people don’t want to have to put their own care above the environment – but it seems no one is considering the impact of future legislative changes on our wellbeing. If there’s going to be a ban, let governments and manufacturers come up with decent, affordable, green alternatives for us all.
 Penny Pepper is a writer and disability rights activist. Her memoir First in the World Somewhere is published by Unbound