oan Shuttleworth has fond memories of her 1940s childhood in Orchard Park, near Buffalo. “When I was seven or eight I used to do the grocery shopping at a small store a block from our house,” she tells me. “It was all paper or cloth bags, and fish and meat would be wrapped in butchers’ paper. There was no plastic.”
The lightweight polythene plastic bags we know today were 
Today, much of our resource-intensive consumerism is still 
Countries around the world are stepping up 
Plastic bag regulation can have unintended consequences. Sales of small trash can liners increased 120% after bag bans, 2019 research by Rebecca Taylor of the University of Sydney revealed, which resulted in thicker and heavier plastics ending up in landfill. While bans led to a 40.3m-pound reduction in plastic waste, that was offset by 11.5m pounds of waste caused by people using new bags instead of reusing carriers.
Look at the carbon emissions of different bags in isolation, and our aversion to plastic bags looks misplaced; they simply use far less energy and water to produce. A paper bag needs to be used three times to equal the emissions of standard single-use polyethylene bags, and a cotton tote needs to be used 131 times, according to 
While that’s horrifying, the study did not deal with far less quantifiable effects of plastic pollution in the oceans and its impact on wildlife. 
For nearly a year, our family has been on a mission to cut out single-use plastics from our home. I’ve had the same massive, sturdy shopping bags since 2002 when I bought them in the British design store Habitat, and these workhorses have done everything from laundry and camping trips to moving house. When we take them shopping, we now also take small homemade cotton produce bags. When we do end up with Ziploc or food bags (largely from other people) we rinse and reuse until they fall apart.
We recycle diligently too, but recent reports about backlogs of US recycling being sent to 
I realised I had been thinking about recycling as a benevolent community service, but that’s wrong. Recycling companies are 
“There’s big demand for bales of recycled paper, and Amazon and others need cardboard for their boxes,” Recology’s Robert Reed tells me. “That’s 80% of the recycling bin. But the challenge for our man here who sells the bales is these low-grade plastics. There’s just no market for them.” Recycling companies also hate plastic bags because they get tangled in their sorting machinery, and can easily get mixed up with paper bales, making them less valuable.
Contamination is a huge issue. Plastic takeout containers can’t be recycled if they contain food – we should rinse or wipe out our recycling – and that’s one reason China stopped accepting America’s plastic waste in January 2018. 
There is a recycling scheme for plastic bags run, rather surprisingly, by the American Chemistry Council (ACC), which 
Business has profited immeasurably for decades by using cheap plastic packaging, and yet the cost of cleaning up after them has fallen to consumers and local governments. “These are complicated, wicked problems that require very complicated, multi-actor solutions,” says Christopher Jones, senior lecturer in environmental psychology at the University of Surrey in the UK. “Government can introduce legislation and guidelines that can also affect retailers, so you need retailers onboard as well. But there is a degree of responsibility on the consumer … if you continue to buy cheap goods that are being sourced in an unsustainable way, then they are going to continue to make them.”
Jones says consumer behaviour is affected by both environmental factors – like a plastic bag surcharge – and by awareness of an issue, which can help someone connect their behaviour to a bigger problem.
“Making people feel proud of their behaviour is a better way of stimulating action,” says Jones. “It comes down to a feeling of empowerment and doing the right thing, and bolsters your identity in a way that makes you more likely to act in a consistent pro-environmental way.”
As ever, these environmental concerns only become more complicated the closer we look. But for all the research there is one simple constant: buy less stuff, and reuse what you have.